  From fairest creatures we desire increase,
  That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
  But as the riper should by time decease,
  His tender heir might bear his memory:
  But thou, contracted to thine own bright eyes,
  Feed'st thy light's flame with self-substantial fuel,
  Making a famine where abundance lies,
  Thy self thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel:
  Thou that art now the world's fresh ornament,
  And only herald to the gaudy spring,
  Within thine own bud buriest thy content,
  And tender churl mak'st waste in niggarding:
  Pity the world, or else this glutton be,
  To eat the world's due, by the grave and thee.
  When forty winters shall besiege thy brow,
  And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
  Thy youth's proud livery so gazed on now,
  Will be a tatter'd weed of small worth held:
  Then being asked, where all thy beauty lies,
  Where all the treasure of thy lusty days;
  To say, within thine own deep sunken eyes,
  Were an all-eating shame, and thriftless praise.
  How much more praise deserv'd thy beauty's use,
  If thou couldst answer 'This fair child of mine
  Shall sum my count, and make my old excuse,'
  Proving his beauty by succession thine!
  This were to be new made when thou art old,
  And see thy blood warm when thou feel'st it cold.
  Look in thy glass and tell the face thou viewest
  Now is the time that face should form another;
  Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest,
  Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother.
  For where is she so fair whose unear'd womb
  Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry?
  Or who is he so fond will be the tomb,
  Of his self-love to stop posterity?
  Thou art thy mother's glass and she in thee
  Calls back the lovely April of her prime;
  So thou through windows of thine age shalt see,
  Despite of wrinkles this thy golden time.
  But if thou live, remember'd not to be,
  Die single and thine image dies with thee.
  Unthrifty loveliness, why dost thou spend
  Upon thy self thy beauty's legacy?
  Nature's bequest gives nothing, but doth lend,
  And being frank she lends to those are free:
  Then, beauteous niggard, why dost thou abuse
  The bounteous largess given thee to give?
  Profitless usurer, why dost thou use
  So great a sum of sums, yet canst not live?
  For having traffic with thy self alone,
  Thou of thy self thy sweet self dost deceive:
  Then how when nature calls thee to be gone,
  What acceptable audit canst thou leave?
  Thy unused beauty must be tombed with thee,
  Which, used, lives th' executor to be.
  Those hours, that with gentle work did frame
  The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell,
  Will play the tyrants to the very same
  And that unfair which fairly doth excel;
  For never-resting time leads summer on
  To hideous winter, and confounds him there;
  Sap checked with frost, and lusty leaves quite gone,
  Beauty o'er-snowed and bareness every where:
  Then were not summer's distillation left,
  A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass,
  Beauty's effect with beauty were bereft,
  Nor it, nor no remembrance what it was:
  But flowers distill'd, though they with winter meet,
  Leese but their show; their substance still lives sweet.
  Then let not winter's ragged hand deface,
  In thee thy summer, ere thou be distill'd:
  Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place
  With beauty's treasure ere it be self-kill'd.
  That use is not forbidden usury,
  Which happies those that pay the willing loan;
  That's for thy self to breed another thee,
  Or ten times happier, be it ten for one;
  Ten times thy self were happier than thou art,
  If ten of thine ten times refigur'd thee:
  Then what could death do if thou shouldst depart,
  Leaving thee living in posterity?
  Be not self-will'd, for thou art much too fair
  To be death's conquest and make worms thine heir.
  Lo! in the orient when the gracious light
  Lifts up his burning head, each under eye
  Doth homage to his new-appearing sight,
  Serving with looks his sacred majesty;
  And having climb'd the steep-up heavenly hill,
  Resembling strong youth in his middle age,
  Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still,
  Attending on his golden pilgrimage:
  But when from highmost pitch, with weary car,
  Like feeble age, he reeleth from the day,
  The eyes, 'fore duteous, now converted are
  From his low tract, and look another way:
  So thou, thyself outgoing in thy noon:
  Unlook'd, on diest unless thou get a son.
  Music to hear, why hear'st thou music sadly?
  Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy:
  Why lov'st thou that which thou receiv'st not gladly,
  Or else receiv'st with pleasure thine annoy?
  If the true concord of well-tuned sounds,
  By unions married, do offend thine ear,
  They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds
  In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear.
  Mark how one string, sweet husband to another,
  Strikes each in each by mutual ordering;
  Resembling sire and child and happy mother,
  Who, all in one, one pleasing note do sing:
  Whose speechless song being many, seeming one,
  Sings this to thee: 'Thou single wilt prove none.'
  Is it for fear to wet a widow's eye,
  That thou consum'st thy self in single life?
  Ah! if thou issueless shalt hap to die,
  The world will wail thee like a makeless wife;
  The world will be thy widow and still weep
  That thou no form of thee hast left behind,
  When every private widow well may keep
  By children's eyes, her husband's shape in mind:
  Look! what an unthrift in the world doth spend
  Shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it;
  But beauty's waste hath in the world an end,
  And kept unused the user so destroys it.
  No love toward others in that bosom sits
  That on himself such murd'rous shame commits.
  For shame! deny that thou bear'st love to any,
  Who for thy self art so unprovident.
  Grant, if thou wilt, thou art belov'd of many,
  But that thou none lov'st is most evident:
  For thou art so possess'd with murderous hate,
  That 'gainst thy self thou stick'st not to conspire,
  Seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate
  Which to repair should be thy chief desire.
  O! change thy thought, that I may change my mind:
  Shall hate be fairer lodg'd than gentle love?
  Be, as thy presence is, gracious and kind,
  Or to thyself at least kind-hearted prove:
  Make thee another self for love of me,
  That beauty still may live in thine or thee.
  As fast as thou shalt wane, so fast thou grow'st,
  In one of thine, from that which thou departest;
  And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestow'st,
  Thou mayst call thine when thou from youth convertest,
  Herein lives wisdom, beauty, and increase;
  Without this folly, age, and cold decay:
  If all were minded so, the times should cease
  And threescore year would make the world away.
  Let those whom nature hath not made for store,
  Harsh, featureless, and rude, barrenly perish:
  Look, whom she best endow'd, she gave thee more;
  Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish:
  She carv'd thee for her seal, and meant thereby,
  Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die.
  When I do count the clock that tells the time,
  And see the brave day sunk in hideous night;
  When I behold the violet past prime,
  And sable curls, all silvered o'er with white;
  When lofty trees I see barren of leaves,
  Which erst from heat did canopy the herd,
  And summer's green all girded up in sheaves,
  Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard,
  Then of thy beauty do I question make,
  That thou among the wastes of time must go,
  Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake
  And die as fast as they see others grow;
  And nothing 'gainst Time's scythe can make defence
  Save breed, to brave him when he takes thee hence.
  O! that you were your self; but, love you are
  No longer yours, than you your self here live:
  Against this coming end you should prepare,
  And your sweet semblance to some other give:
  So should that beauty which you hold in lease
  Find no determination; then you were
  Yourself again, after yourself's decease,
  When your sweet issue your sweet form should bear.
  Who lets so fair a house fall to decay,
  Which husbandry in honour might uphold,
  Against the stormy gusts of winter's day
  And barren rage of death's eternal cold?
  O! none but unthrifts. Dear my love, you know,
  You had a father: let your son say so.
  Not from the stars do I my judgement pluck;
  And yet methinks I have astronomy,
  But not to tell of good or evil luck,
  Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons' quality;
  Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell,
  Pointing to each his thunder, rain and wind,
  Or say with princes if it shall go well
  By oft predict that I in heaven find:
  But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive,
  And constant stars in them I read such art
  As 'Truth and beauty shall together thrive,
  If from thyself, to store thou wouldst convert';
  Or else of thee this I prognosticate:
  'Thy end is truth's and beauty's doom and date.'
  When I consider every thing that grows
  Holds in perfection but a little moment,
  That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows
  Whereon the stars in secret influence comment;
  When I perceive that men as plants increase,
  Cheered and checked even by the self-same sky,
  Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease,
  And wear their brave state out of memory;
  Then the conceit of this inconstant stay
  Sets you most rich in youth before my sight,
  Where wasteful Time debateth with decay
  To change your day of youth to sullied night,
  And all in war with Time for love of you,
  As he takes from you, I engraft you new.
  But wherefore do not you a mightier way
  Make war upon this bloody tyrant, Time?
  And fortify your self in your decay
  With means more blessed than my barren rhyme?
  Now stand you on the top of happy hours,
  And many maiden gardens, yet unset,
  With virtuous wish would bear you living flowers,
  Much liker than your painted counterfeit:
  So should the lines of life that life repair,
  Which this, Time's pencil, or my pupil pen,
  Neither in inward worth nor outward fair,
  Can make you live your self in eyes of men.
  To give away yourself, keeps yourself still,
  And you must live, drawn by your own sweet skill.
  Who will believe my verse in time to come,
  If it were fill'd with your most high deserts?
  Though yet heaven knows it is but as a tomb
  Which hides your life, and shows not half your parts.
  If I could write the beauty of your eyes,
  And in fresh numbers number all your graces,
  The age to come would say 'This poet lies;
  Such heavenly touches ne'er touch'd earthly faces.'
  So should my papers, yellow'd with their age,
  Be scorn'd, like old men of less truth than tongue,
  And your true rights be term'd a poet's rage
  And stretched metre of an antique song:
  But were some child of yours alive that time,
  You should live twice,--in it, and in my rhyme.
  Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?
  Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
  Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
  And summer's lease hath all too short a date:
  Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
  And often is his gold complexion dimm'd,
  And every fair from fair sometime declines,
  By chance, or nature's changing course untrimm'd:
  But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
  Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st,
  Nor shall death brag thou wander'st in his shade,
  When in eternal lines to time thou grow'st,
  So long as men can breathe, or eyes can see,
  So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.
  Devouring Time, blunt thou the lion's paws,
  And make the earth devour her own sweet brood;
  Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger's jaws,
  And burn the long-liv'd phoenix, in her blood;
  Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleets,
  And do whate'er thou wilt, swift-footed Time,
  To the wide world and all her fading sweets;
  But I forbid thee one most heinous crime:
  O! carve not with thy hours my love's fair brow,
  Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen;
  Him in thy course untainted do allow
  For beauty's pattern to succeeding men.
  Yet, do thy worst old Time: despite thy wrong,
  My love shall in my verse ever live young.
  A woman's face with nature's own hand painted,
  Hast thou, the master mistress of my passion;
  A woman's gentle heart, but not acquainted
  With shifting change, as is false women's fashion:
  An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling,
  Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth;
  A man in hue all 'hues' in his controlling,
  Which steals men's eyes and women's souls amazeth.
  And for a woman wert thou first created;
  Till Nature, as she wrought thee, fell a-doting,
  And by addition me of thee defeated,
  By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.
  But since she prick'd thee out for women's pleasure,
  Mine be thy love and thy love's use their treasure.
  So is it not with me as with that Muse,
  Stirr'd by a painted beauty to his verse,
  Who heaven itself for ornament doth use
  And every fair with his fair doth rehearse,
  Making a couplement of proud compare.
  With sun and moon, with earth and sea's rich gems,
  With April's first-born flowers, and all things rare,
  That heaven's air in this huge rondure hems.
  O! let me, true in love, but truly write,
  And then believe me, my love is as fair
  As any mother's child, though not so bright
  As those gold candles fix'd in heaven's air:
  Let them say more that like of hearsay well;
  I will not praise that purpose not to sell.
  My glass shall not persuade me I am old,
  So long as youth and thou are of one date;
  But when in thee time's furrows I behold,
  Then look I death my days should expiate.
  For all that beauty that doth cover thee,
  Is but the seemly raiment of my heart,
  Which in thy breast doth live, as thine in me:
  How can I then be elder than thou art?
  O! therefore love, be of thyself so wary
  As I, not for myself, but for thee will;
  Bearing thy heart, which I will keep so chary
  As tender nurse her babe from faring ill.
  Presume not on thy heart when mine is slain,
  Thou gav'st me thine not to give back again.
  As an unperfect actor on the stage,
  Who with his fear is put beside his part,
  Or some fierce thing replete with too much rage,
  Whose strength's abundance weakens his own heart;
  So I, for fear of trust, forget to say
  The perfect ceremony of love's rite,
  And in mine own love's strength seem to decay,
  O'ercharg'd with burthen of mine own love's might.
  O! let my looks be then the eloquence
  And dumb presagers of my speaking breast,
  Who plead for love, and look for recompense,
  More than that tongue that more hath more express'd.
  O! learn to read what silent love hath writ:
  To hear with eyes belongs to love's fine wit.
  Mine eye hath play'd the painter and hath stell'd,
  Thy beauty's form in table of my heart;
  My body is the frame wherein 'tis held,
  And perspective it is best painter's art.
  For through the painter must you see his skill,
  To find where your true image pictur'd lies,
  Which in my bosom's shop is hanging still,
  That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes.
  Now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done:
  Mine eyes have drawn thy shape, and thine for me
  Are windows to my breast, where-through the sun
  Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee;
  Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art,
  They draw but what they see, know not the heart.
  Let those who are in favour with their stars
  Of public honour and proud titles boast,
  Whilst I, whom fortune of such triumph bars
  Unlook'd for joy in that I honour most.
  Great princes' favourites their fair leaves spread
  But as the marigold at the sun's eye,
  And in themselves their pride lies buried,
  For at a frown they in their glory die.
  The painful warrior famoused for fight,
  After a thousand victories once foil'd,
  Is from the book of honour razed quite,
  And all the rest forgot for which he toil'd:
  Then happy I, that love and am belov'd,
  Where I may not remove nor be remov'd.
  Lord of my love, to whom in vassalage
  Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit,
  To thee I send this written embassage,
  To witness duty, not to show my wit:
  Duty so great, which wit so poor as mine
  May make seem bare, in wanting words to show it,
  But that I hope some good conceit of thine
  In thy soul's thought, all naked, will bestow it:
  Till whatsoever star that guides my moving,
  Points on me graciously with fair aspect,
  And puts apparel on my tatter'd loving,
  To show me worthy of thy sweet respect:
  Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee;
  Till then, not show my head where thou mayst prove me.
  Weary with toil, I haste me to my bed,
  The dear respose for limbs with travel tir'd;
  But then begins a journey in my head
  To work my mind, when body's work's expired:
  For then my thoughts--from far where I abide--
  Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee,
  And keep my drooping eyelids open wide,
  Looking on darkness which the blind do see:
  Save that my soul's imaginary sight
  Presents thy shadow to my sightless view,
  Which, like a jewel hung in ghastly night,
  Makes black night beauteous, and her old face new.
  Lo! thus, by day my limbs, by night my mind,
  For thee, and for myself, no quiet find.
  How can I then return in happy plight,
  That am debarre'd the benefit of rest?
  When day's oppression is not eas'd by night,
  But day by night and night by day oppress'd,
  And each, though enemies to either's reign,
  Do in consent shake hands to torture me,
  The one by toil, the other to complain
  How far I toil, still farther off from thee.
  I tell the day, to please him thou art bright,
  And dost him grace when clouds do blot the heaven:
  So flatter I the swart-complexion'd night,
  When sparkling stars twire not thou gild'st the even.
  But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer,
  And night doth nightly make grief's length seem stronger.
  When in disgrace with fortune and men's eyes
  I all alone beweep my outcast state,
  And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries,
  And look upon myself, and curse my fate,
  Wishing me like to one more rich in hope,
  Featur'd like him, like him with friends possess'd,
  Desiring this man's art, and that man's scope,
  With what I most enjoy contented least;
  Yet in these thoughts my self almost despising,
  Haply I think on thee,-- and then my state,
  Like to the lark at break of day arising
  From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven's gate;
  For thy sweet love remember'd such wealth brings
  That then I scorn to change my state with kings.
  When to the sessions of sweet silent thought
  I summon up remembrance of things past,
  I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought,
  And with old woes new wail my dear time's waste:
  Then can I drown an eye, unused to flow,
  For precious friends hid in death's dateless night,
  And weep afresh love's long since cancell'd woe,
  And moan the expense of many a vanish'd sight:
  Then can I grieve at grievances foregone,
  And heavily from woe to woe tell o'er
  The sad account of fore-bemoaned moan,
  Which I new pay as if not paid before.
  But if the while I think on thee, dear friend,
  All losses are restor'd and sorrows end.
  Thy bosom is endeared with all hearts,
  Which I by lacking have supposed dead;
  And there reigns Love, and all Love's loving parts,
  And all those friends which I thought buried.
  How many a holy and obsequious tear
  Hath dear religious love stol'n from mine eye,
  As interest of the dead, which now appear
  But things remov'd that hidden in thee lie!
  Thou art the grave where buried love doth live,
  Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone,
  Who all their parts of me to thee did give,
  That due of many now is thine alone:
  Their images I lov'd, I view in thee,
  And thou--all they--hast all the all of me.
  If thou survive my well-contented day,
  When that churl Death my bones with dust shall cover
  And shalt by fortune once more re-survey
  These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover,
  Compare them with the bett'ring of the time,
  And though they be outstripp'd by every pen,
  Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme,
  Exceeded by the height of happier men.
  O! then vouchsafe me but this loving thought:
  'Had my friend's Muse grown with this growing age,
  A dearer birth than this his love had brought,
  To march in ranks of better equipage:
  But since he died and poets better prove,
  Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love'.
  Full many a glorious morning have I seen
  Flatter the mountain tops with sovereign eye,
  Kissing with golden face the meadows green,
  Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy;
  Anon permit the basest clouds to ride
  With ugly rack on his celestial face,
  And from the forlorn world his visage hide,
  Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace:
  Even so my sun one early morn did shine,
  With all triumphant splendour on my brow;
  But out! alack! he was but one hour mine,
  The region cloud hath mask'd him from me now.
  Yet him for this my love no whit disdaineth;
  Suns of the world may stain when heaven's sun staineth.
  Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day,
  And make me travel forth without my cloak,
  To let base clouds o'ertake me in my way,
  Hiding thy bravery in their rotten smoke?
  'Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break,
  To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face,
  For no man well of such a salve can speak,
  That heals the wound, and cures not the disgrace:
  Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief;
  Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss:
  The offender's sorrow lends but weak relief
  To him that bears the strong offence's cross.
  Ah! but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds,
  And they are rich and ransom all ill deeds.
  No more be griev'd at that which thou hast done:
  Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud:
  Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun,
  And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud.
  All men make faults, and even I in this,
  Authorizing thy trespass with compare,
  Myself corrupting, salving thy amiss,
  Excusing thy sins more than thy sins are;
  For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense,--
  Thy adverse party is thy advocate,--
  And 'gainst myself a lawful plea commence:
  Such civil war is in my love and hate,
  That I an accessary needs must be,
  To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me.
  Let me confess that we two must be twain,
  Although our undivided loves are one:
  So shall those blots that do with me remain,
  Without thy help, by me be borne alone.
  In our two loves there is but one respect,
  Though in our lives a separable spite,
  Which though it alter not love's sole effect,
  Yet doth it steal sweet hours from love's delight.
  I may not evermore acknowledge thee,
  Lest my bewailed guilt should do thee shame,
  Nor thou with public kindness honour me,
  Unless thou take that honour from thy name:
  But do not so, I love thee in such sort,
  As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.
  As a decrepit father takes delight
  To see his active child do deeds of youth,
  So I, made lame by Fortune's dearest spite,
  Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth;
  For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit,
  Or any of these all, or all, or more,
  Entitled in thy parts, do crowned sit,
  I make my love engrafted, to this store:
  So then I am not lame, poor, nor despis'd,
  Whilst that this shadow doth such substance give
  That I in thy abundance am suffic'd,
  And by a part of all thy glory live.
  Look what is best, that best I wish in thee:
  This wish I have; then ten times happy me!
  How can my muse want subject to invent,
  While thou dost breathe, that pour'st into my verse
  Thine own sweet argument, too excellent
  For every vulgar paper to rehearse?
  O! give thy self the thanks, if aught in me
  Worthy perusal stand against thy sight;
  For who's so dumb that cannot write to thee,
  When thou thy self dost give invention light?
  Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth
  Than those old nine which rhymers invocate;
  And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth
  Eternal numbers to outlive long date.
  If my slight muse do please these curious days,
  The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.
  O! how thy worth with manners may I sing,
  When thou art all the better part of me?
  What can mine own praise to mine own self bring?
  And what is't but mine own when I praise thee?
  Even for this, let us divided live,
  And our dear love lose name of single one,
  That by this separation I may give
  That due to thee which thou deserv'st alone.
  O absence! what a torment wouldst thou prove,
  Were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave,
  To entertain the time with thoughts of love,
  Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive,
  And that thou teachest how to make one twain,
  By praising him here who doth hence remain.
  Take all my loves, my love, yea take them all;
  What hast thou then more than thou hadst before?
  No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call;
  All mine was thine, before thou hadst this more.
  Then, if for my love, thou my love receivest,
  I cannot blame thee, for my love thou usest;
  But yet be blam'd, if thou thy self deceivest
  By wilful taste of what thyself refusest.
  I do forgive thy robbery, gentle thief,
  Although thou steal thee all my poverty:
  And yet, love knows it is a greater grief
  To bear love's wrong, than hate's known injury.
  Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows,
  Kill me with spites yet we must not be foes.
  Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits,
  When I am sometime absent from thy heart,
  Thy beauty, and thy years full well befits,
  For still temptation follows where thou art.
  Gentle thou art, and therefore to be won,
  Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assail'd;
  And when a woman woos, what woman's son
  Will sourly leave her till he have prevail'd?
  Ay me! but yet thou mightst my seat forbear,
  And chide thy beauty and thy straying youth,
  Who lead thee in their riot even there
  Where thou art forced to break a twofold truth:--
  Hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee,
  Thine by thy beauty being false to me.
  That thou hast her it is not all my grief,
  And yet it may be said I loved her dearly;
  That she hath thee is of my wailing chief,
  A loss in love that touches me more nearly.
  Loving offenders thus I will excuse ye:
  Thou dost love her, because thou know'st I love her;
  And for my sake even so doth she abuse me,
  Suffering my friend for my sake to approve her.
  If I lose thee, my loss is my love's gain,
  And losing her, my friend hath found that loss;
  Both find each other, and I lose both twain,
  And both for my sake lay on me this cross:
  But here's the joy; my friend and I are one;
  Sweet flattery! then she loves but me alone.
  When most I wink, then do mine eyes best see,
  For all the day they view things unrespected;
  But when I sleep, in dreams they look on thee,
  And darkly bright, are bright in dark directed.
  Then thou, whose shadow shadows doth make bright,
  How would thy shadow's form form happy show
  To the clear day with thy much clearer light,
  When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so!
  How would, I say, mine eyes be blessed made
  By looking on thee in the living day,
  When in dead night thy fair imperfect shade
  Through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay!
  All days are nights to see till I see thee,
  And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.
  If the dull substance of my flesh were thought,
  Injurious distance should not stop my way;
  For then despite of space I would be brought,
  From limits far remote, where thou dost stay.
  No matter then although my foot did stand
  Upon the farthest earth remov'd from thee;
  For nimble thought can jump both sea and land,
  As soon as think the place where he would be.
  But, ah! thought kills me that I am not thought,
  To leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone,
  But that so much of earth and water wrought,
  I must attend time's leisure with my moan;
  Receiving nought by elements so slow
  But heavy tears, badges of either's woe.
  The other two, slight air, and purging fire
  Are both with thee, wherever I abide;
  The first my thought, the other my desire,
  These present-absent with swift motion slide.
  For when these quicker elements are gone
  In tender embassy of love to thee,
  My life, being made of four, with two alone
  Sinks down to death, oppress'd with melancholy;
  Until life's composition be recur'd
  By those swift messengers return'd from thee,
  Who even but now come back again, assur'd,
  Of thy fair health, recounting it to me:
  This told, I joy; but then no longer glad,
  I send them back again, and straight grow sad.
  Mine eye and heart are at a mortal war,
  How to divide the conquest of thy sight;
  Mine eye my heart thy picture's sight would bar,
  My heart mine eye the freedom of that right.
  My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie,--
  A closet never pierc'd with crystal eyes--
  But the defendant doth that plea deny,
  And says in him thy fair appearance lies.
  To side this title is impannelled
  A quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart;
  And by their verdict is determined
  The clear eye's moiety, and the dear heart's part:
  As thus; mine eye's due is thy outward part,
  And my heart's right, thy inward love of heart.
  Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is took,
  And each doth good turns now unto the other:
  When that mine eye is famish'd for a look,
  Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother,
  With my love's picture then my eye doth feast,
  And to the painted banquet bids my heart;
  Another time mine eye is my heart's guest,
  And in his thoughts of love doth share a part:
  So, either by thy picture or my love,
  Thy self away, art present still with me;
  For thou not farther than my thoughts canst move,
  And I am still with them, and they with thee;
  Or, if they sleep, thy picture in my sight
  Awakes my heart, to heart's and eye's delight.
  How careful was I when I took my way,
  Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,
  That to my use it might unused stay
  From hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust!
  But thou, to whom my jewels trifles are,
  Most worthy comfort, now my greatest grief,
  Thou best of dearest, and mine only care,
  Art left the prey of every vulgar thief.
  Thee have I not lock'd up in any chest,
  Save where thou art not, though I feel thou art,
  Within the gentle closure of my breast,
  From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part;
  And even thence thou wilt be stol'n I fear,
  For truth proves thievish for a prize so dear.
  Against that time, if ever that time come,
  When I shall see thee frown on my defects,
  When as thy love hath cast his utmost sum,
  Call'd to that audit by advis'd respects;
  Against that time when thou shalt strangely pass,
  And scarcely greet me with that sun, thine eye,
  When love, converted from the thing it was,
  Shall reasons find of settled gravity;
  Against that time do I ensconce me here,
  Within the knowledge of mine own desert,
  And this my hand, against my self uprear,
  To guard the lawful reasons on thy part:
  To leave poor me thou hast the strength of laws,
  Since why to love I can allege no cause.
  How heavy do I journey on the way,
  When what I seek, my weary travel's end,
  Doth teach that ease and that repose to say,
  'Thus far the miles are measured from thy friend!'
  The beast that bears me, tired with my woe,
  Plods dully on, to bear that weight in me,
  As if by some instinct the wretch did know
  His rider lov'd not speed, being made from thee:
  The bloody spur cannot provoke him on,
  That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide,
  Which heavily he answers with a groan,
  More sharp to me than spurring to his side;
  For that same groan doth put this in my mind,
  My grief lies onward, and my joy behind.
  Thus can my love excuse the slow offence
  Of my dull bearer when from thee I speed:
  From where thou art why should I haste me thence?
  Till I return, of posting is no need.
  O! what excuse will my poor beast then find,
  When swift extremity can seem but slow?
  Then should I spur, though mounted on the wind,
  In winged speed no motion shall I know,
  Then can no horse with my desire keep pace;
  Therefore desire, of perfect'st love being made,
  Shall neigh--no dull flesh--in his fiery race;
  But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade,--
  'Since from thee going, he went wilful-slow,
  Towards thee I'll run, and give him leave to go.'
  So am I as the rich, whose blessed key,
  Can bring him to his sweet up-locked treasure,
  The which he will not every hour survey,
  For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure.
  Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare,
  Since, seldom coming in that long year set,
  Like stones of worth they thinly placed are,
  Or captain jewels in the carcanet.
  So is the time that keeps you as my chest,
  Or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide,
  To make some special instant special-blest,
  By new unfolding his imprison'd pride.
  Blessed are you whose worthiness gives scope,
  Being had, to triumph; being lacked, to hope.
  What is your substance, whereof are you made,
  That millions of strange shadows on you tend?
  Since every one, hath every one, one shade,
  And you but one, can every shadow lend.
  Describe Adonis, and the counterfeit
  Is poorly imitated after you;
  On Helen's cheek all art of beauty set,
  And you in Grecian tires are painted new:
  Speak of the spring, and foison of the year,
  The one doth shadow of your beauty show,
  The other as your bounty doth appear;
  And you in every blessed shape we know.
  In all external grace you have some part,
  But you like none, none you, for constant heart.
  O! how much more doth beauty beauteous seem
  By that sweet ornament which truth doth give.
  The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem
  For that sweet odour, which doth in it live.
  The canker blooms have full as deep a dye
  As the perfumed tincture of the roses.
  Hang on such thorns, and play as wantonly
  When summer's breath their masked buds discloses:
  But, for their virtue only is their show,
  They live unwoo'd, and unrespected fade;
  Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so;
  Of their sweet deaths, are sweetest odours made:
  And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth,
  When that shall vade, by verse distills your truth.
  Not marble, nor the gilded monuments
  Of princes, shall outlive this powerful rhyme;
  But you shall shine more bright in these contents
  Than unswept stone, besmear'd with sluttish time.
  When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
  And broils root out the work of masonry,
  Nor Mars his sword, nor war's quick fire shall burn
  The living record of your memory.
  'Gainst death, and all-oblivious enmity
  Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room
  Even in the eyes of all posterity
  That wear this world out to the ending doom.
  So, till the judgment that yourself arise,
  You live in this, and dwell in lovers' eyes.
  Sweet love, renew thy force; be it not said
  Thy edge should blunter be than appetite,
  Which but to-day by feeding is allay'd,
  To-morrow sharpened in his former might:
  So, love, be thou, although to-day thou fill
  Thy hungry eyes, even till they wink with fulness,
  To-morrow see again, and do not kill
  The spirit of love, with a perpetual dulness.
  Let this sad interim like the ocean be
  Which parts the shore, where two contracted new
  Come daily to the banks, that when they see
  Return of love, more blest may be the view;
  Or call it winter, which being full of care,
  Makes summer's welcome, thrice more wished, more rare.
  Being your slave what should I do but tend,
  Upon the hours, and times of your desire?
  I have no precious time at all to spend;
  Nor services to do, till you require.
  Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour,
  Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you,
  Nor think the bitterness of absence sour,
  When you have bid your servant once adieu;
  Nor dare I question with my jealous thought
  Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,
  But, like a sad slave, stay and think of nought
  Save, where you are, how happy you make those.
  So true a fool is love, that in your will,
  Though you do anything, he thinks no ill.
  That god forbid, that made me first your slave,
  I should in thought control your times of pleasure,
  Or at your hand the account of hours to crave,
  Being your vassal, bound to stay your leisure!
  O! let me suffer, being at your beck,
  The imprison'd absence of your liberty;
  And patience, tame to sufferance, bide each check,
  Without accusing you of injury.
  Be where you list, your charter is so strong
  That you yourself may privilage your time
  To what you will; to you it doth belong
  Yourself to pardon of self-doing crime.
  I am to wait, though waiting so be hell,
  Not blame your pleasure be it ill or well.
  If there be nothing new, but that which is
  Hath been before, how are our brains beguil'd,
  Which labouring for invention bear amiss
  The second burthen of a former child!
  O! that record could with a backward look,
  Even of five hundred courses of the sun,
  Show me your image in some antique book,
  Since mind at first in character was done!
  That I might see what the old world could say
  To this composed wonder of your frame;
  Wh'r we are mended, or wh'r better they,
  Or whether revolution be the same.
  O! sure I am the wits of former days,
  To subjects worse have given admiring praise.
  Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore,
  So do our minutes hasten to their end;
  Each changing place with that which goes before,
  In sequent toil all forwards do contend.
  Nativity, once in the main of light,
  Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crown'd,
  Crooked eclipses 'gainst his glory fight,
  And Time that gave doth now his gift confound.
  Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth
  And delves the parallels in beauty's brow,
  Feeds on the rarities of nature's truth,
  And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow:
  And yet to times in hope, my verse shall stand.
  Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand.
  Is it thy will, thy image should keep open
  My heavy eyelids to the weary night?
  Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken,
  While shadows like to thee do mock my sight?
  Is it thy spirit that thou send'st from thee
  So far from home into my deeds to pry,
  To find out shames and idle hours in me,
  The scope and tenure of thy jealousy?
  O, no! thy love, though much, is not so great:
  It is my love that keeps mine eye awake:
  Mine own true love that doth my rest defeat,
  To play the watchman ever for thy sake:
  For thee watch I, whilst thou dost wake elsewhere,
  From me far off, with others all too near.
  Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye
  And all my soul, and all my every part;
  And for this sin there is no remedy,
  It is so grounded inward in my heart.
  Methinks no face so gracious is as mine,
  No shape so true, no truth of such account;
  And for myself mine own worth do define,
  As I all other in all worths surmount.
  But when my glass shows me myself indeed
  Beated and chopp'd with tanned antiquity,
  Mine own self-love quite contrary I read;
  Self so self-loving were iniquity.
  'Tis thee,--myself,--that for myself I praise,
  Painting my age with beauty of thy days.
  Against my love shall be as I am now,
  With Time's injurious hand crush'd and o'erworn;
  When hours have drain'd his blood and fill'd his brow
  With lines and wrinkles; when his youthful morn
  Hath travell'd on to age's steepy night;
  And all those beauties whereof now he's king
  Are vanishing, or vanished out of sight,
  Stealing away the treasure of his spring;
  For such a time do I now fortify
  Against confounding age's cruel knife,
  That he shall never cut from memory
  My sweet love's beauty, though my lover's life:
  His beauty shall in these black lines be seen,
  And they shall live, and he in them still green.
  When I have seen by Time's fell hand defac'd
  The rich-proud cost of outworn buried age;
  When sometime lofty towers I see down-raz'd,
  And brass eternal slave to mortal rage;
  When I have seen the hungry ocean gain
  Advantage on the kingdom of the shore,
  And the firm soil win of the watery main,
  Increasing store with loss, and loss with store;
  When I have seen such interchange of state,
  Or state itself confounded, to decay;
  Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate--
  That Time will come and take my love away.
  This thought is as a death which cannot choose
  But weep to have, that which it fears to lose.
  Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea,
  But sad mortality o'ersways their power,
  How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea,
  Whose action is no stronger than a flower?
  O! how shall summer's honey breath hold out,
  Against the wrackful siege of battering days,
  When rocks impregnable are not so stout,
  Nor gates of steel so strong but Time decays?
  O fearful meditation! where, alack,
  Shall Time's best jewel from Time's chest lie hid?
  Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back?
  Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?
  O! none, unless this miracle have might,
  That in black ink my love may still shine bright.
  Tired with all these, for restful death I cry,
  As to behold desert a beggar born,
  And needy nothing trimm'd in jollity,
  And purest faith unhappily forsworn,
  And gilded honour shamefully misplac'd,
  And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted,
  And right perfection wrongfully disgrac'd,
  And strength by limping sway disabled
  And art made tongue-tied by authority,
  And folly--doctor-like--controlling skill,
  And simple truth miscall'd simplicity,
  And captive good attending captain ill:
  Tir'd with all these, from these would I be gone,
  Save that, to die, I leave my love alone.
  Ah! wherefore with infection should he live,
  And with his presence grace impiety,
  That sin by him advantage should achieve,
  And lace itself with his society?
  Why should false painting imitate his cheek,
  And steel dead seeming of his living hue?
  Why should poor beauty indirectly seek
  Roses of shadow, since his rose is true?
  Why should he live, now Nature bankrupt is,
  Beggar'd of blood to blush through lively veins?
  For she hath no exchequer now but his,
  And proud of many, lives upon his gains.
  O! him she stores, to show what wealth she had
  In days long since, before these last so bad.
  Thus is his cheek the map of days outworn,
  When beauty lived and died as flowers do now,
  Before these bastard signs of fair were born,
  Or durst inhabit on a living brow;
  Before the golden tresses of the dead,
  The right of sepulchres, were shorn away,
  To live a second life on second head;
  Ere beauty's dead fleece made another gay:
  In him those holy antique hours are seen,
  Without all ornament, itself and true,
  Making no summer of another's green,
  Robbing no old to dress his beauty new;
  And him as for a map doth Nature store,
  To show false Art what beauty was of yore.
  Those parts of thee that the world's eye doth view
  Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend;
  All tongues--the voice of souls--give thee that due,
  Uttering bare truth, even so as foes commend.
  Thy outward thus with outward praise is crown'd;
  But those same tongues, that give thee so thine own,
  In other accents do this praise confound
  By seeing farther than the eye hath shown.
  They look into the beauty of thy mind,
  And that in guess they measure by thy deeds;
  Then--churls--their thoughts, although their eyes were kind,
  To thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds:
  But why thy odour matcheth not thy show,
  The soil is this, that thou dost common grow.
  That thou art blam'd shall not be thy defect,
  For slander's mark was ever yet the fair;
  The ornament of beauty is suspect,
  A crow that flies in heaven's sweetest air.
  So thou be good, slander doth but approve
  Thy worth the greater being woo'd of time;
  For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love,
  And thou present'st a pure unstained prime.
  Thou hast passed by the ambush of young days
  Either not assail'd, or victor being charg'd;
  Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise,
  To tie up envy, evermore enlarg'd,
  If some suspect of ill mask'd not thy show,
  Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.
  No longer mourn for me when I am dead
  Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell
  Give warning to the world that I am fled
  From this vile world with vilest worms to dwell:
  Nay, if you read this line, remember not
  The hand that writ it, for I love you so,
  That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot,
  If thinking on me then should make you woe.
  O! if,--I say you look upon this verse,
  When I perhaps compounded am with clay,
  Do not so much as my poor name rehearse;
  But let your love even with my life decay;
  Lest the wise world should look into your moan,
  And mock you with me after I am gone.
  O! lest the world should task you to recite
  What merit lived in me, that you should love
  After my death,--dear love, forget me quite,
  For you in me can nothing worthy prove;
  Unless you would devise some virtuous lie,
  To do more for me than mine own desert,
  And hang more praise upon deceased I
  Than niggard truth would willingly impart:
  O! lest your true love may seem false in this
  That you for love speak well of me untrue,
  My name be buried where my body is,
  And live no more to shame nor me nor you.
  For I am shamed by that which I bring forth,
  And so should you, to love things nothing worth.
  That time of year thou mayst in me behold
  When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang
  Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,
  Bare ruin'd choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.
  In me thou see'st the twilight of such day
  As after sunset fadeth in the west;
  Which by and by black night doth take away,
  Death's second self, that seals up all in rest.
  In me thou see'st the glowing of such fire,
  That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,
  As the death-bed, whereon it must expire,
  Consum'd with that which it was nourish'd by.
  This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong,
  To love that well, which thou must leave ere long.
  But be contented: when that fell arrest
  Without all bail shall carry me away,
  My life hath in this line some interest,
  Which for memorial still with thee shall stay.
  When thou reviewest this, thou dost review
  The very part was consecrate to thee:
  The earth can have but earth, which is his due;
  My spirit is thine, the better part of me:
  So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life,
  The prey of worms, my body being dead;
  The coward conquest of a wretch's knife,
  Too base of thee to be remembered.
  The worth of that is that which it contains,
  And that is this, and this with thee remains.
  So are you to my thoughts as food to life,
  Or as sweet-season'd showers are to the ground;
  And for the peace of you I hold such strife
  As 'twixt a miser and his wealth is found.
  Now proud as an enjoyer, and anon
  Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure;
  Now counting best to be with you alone,
  Then better'd that the world may see my pleasure:
  Sometime all full with feasting on your sight,
  And by and by clean starved for a look;
  Possessing or pursuing no delight,
  Save what is had, or must from you be took.
  Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day,
  Or gluttoning on all, or all away.
  Why is my verse so barren of new pride,
  So far from variation or quick change?
  Why with the time do I not glance aside
  To new-found methods, and to compounds strange?
  Why write I still all one, ever the same,
  And keep invention in a noted weed,
  That every word doth almost tell my name,
  Showing their birth, and where they did proceed?
  O! know sweet love I always write of you,
  And you and love are still my argument;
  So all my best is dressing old words new,
  Spending again what is already spent:
  For as the sun is daily new and old,
  So is my love still telling what is told.
  Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear,
  Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste;
  These vacant leaves thy mind's imprint will bear,
  And of this book, this learning mayst thou taste.
  The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show
  Of mouthed graves will give thee memory;
  Thou by thy dial's shady stealth mayst know
  Time's thievish progress to eternity.
  Look! what thy memory cannot contain,
  Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find
  Those children nursed, deliver'd from thy brain,
  To take a new acquaintance of thy mind.
  These offices, so oft as thou wilt look,
  Shall profit thee and much enrich thy book.
  So oft have I invoked thee for my Muse,
  And found such fair assistance in my verse
  As every alien pen hath got my use
  And under thee their poesy disperse.
  Thine eyes, that taught the dumb on high to sing
  And heavy ignorance aloft to fly,
  Have added feathers to the learned's wing
  And given grace a double majesty.
  Yet be most proud of that which I compile,
  Whose influence is thine, and born of thee:
  In others' works thou dost but mend the style,
  And arts with thy sweet graces graced be;
  But thou art all my art, and dost advance
  As high as learning, my rude ignorance.
  Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid,
  My verse alone had all thy gentle grace;
  But now my gracious numbers are decay'd,
  And my sick Muse doth give an other place.
  I grant, sweet love, thy lovely argument
  Deserves the travail of a worthier pen;
  Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent
  He robs thee of, and pays it thee again.
  He lends thee virtue, and he stole that word
  From thy behaviour; beauty doth he give,
  And found it in thy cheek: he can afford
  No praise to thee, but what in thee doth live.
  Then thank him not for that which he doth say,
  Since what he owes thee, thou thyself dost pay.
  O! how I faint when I of you do write,
  Knowing a better spirit doth use your name,
  And in the praise thereof spends all his might,
  To make me tongue-tied speaking of your fame!
  But since your worth--wide as the ocean is,--
  The humble as the proudest sail doth bear,
  My saucy bark, inferior far to his,
  On your broad main doth wilfully appear.
  Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat,
  Whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride;
  Or, being wrack'd, I am a worthless boat,
  He of tall building, and of goodly pride:
  Then if he thrive and I be cast away,
  The worst was this,--my love was my decay.
  Or I shall live your epitaph to make,
  Or you survive when I in earth am rotten;
  From hence your memory death cannot take,
  Although in me each part will be forgotten.
  Your name from hence immortal life shall have,
  Though I, once gone, to all the world must die:
  The earth can yield me but a common grave,
  When you entombed in men's eyes shall lie.
  Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
  Which eyes not yet created shall o'er-read;
  And tongues to be, your being shall rehearse,
  When all the breathers of this world are dead;
  You still shall live,--such virtue hath my pen,--
  Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men.
  I grant thou wert not married to my Muse,
  And therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook
  The dedicated words which writers use
  Of their fair subject, blessing every book.
  Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue,
  Finding thy worth a limit past my praise;
  And therefore art enforced to seek anew
  Some fresher stamp of the time-bettering days.
  And do so, love; yet when they have devis'd,
  What strained touches rhetoric can lend,
  Thou truly fair, wert truly sympathiz'd
  In true plain words, by thy true-telling friend;
  And their gross painting might be better us'd
  Where cheeks need blood; in thee it is abus'd.
  I never saw that you did painting need,
  And therefore to your fair no painting set;
  I found, or thought I found, you did exceed
  That barren tender of a poet's debt:
  And therefore have I slept in your report,
  That you yourself, being extant, well might show
  How far a modern quill doth come too short,
  Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow.
  This silence for my sin you did impute,
  Which shall be most my glory being dumb;
  For I impair not beauty being mute,
  When others would give life, and bring a tomb.
  There lives more life in one of your fair eyes
  Than both your poets can in praise devise.
  Who is it that says most, which can say more,
  Than this rich praise,--that you alone, are you?
  In whose confine immured is the store
  Which should example where your equal grew.
  Lean penury within that pen doth dwell
  That to his subject lends not some small glory;
  But he that writes of you, if he can tell
  That you are you, so dignifies his story,
  Let him but copy what in you is writ,
  Not making worse what nature made so clear,
  And such a counterpart shall fame his wit,
  Making his style admired every where.
  You to your beauteous blessings add a curse,
  Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse.
  My tongue-tied Muse in manners holds her still,
  While comments of your praise richly compil'd,
  Reserve their character with golden quill,
  And precious phrase by all the Muses fil'd.
  I think good thoughts, whilst others write good words,
  And like unlettered clerk still cry 'Amen'
  To every hymn that able spirit affords,
  In polish'd form of well-refined pen.
  Hearing you praised, I say ''tis so, 'tis true,'
  And to the most of praise add something more;
  But that is in my thought, whose love to you,
  Though words come hindmost, holds his rank before.
  Then others, for the breath of words respect,
  Me for my dumb thoughts, speaking in effect.
  Was it the proud full sail of his great verse,
  Bound for the prize of all too precious you,
  That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse,
  Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew?
  Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write,
  Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead?
  No, neither he, nor his compeers by night
  Giving him aid, my verse astonished.
  He, nor that affable familiar ghost
  Which nightly gulls him with intelligence,
  As victors of my silence cannot boast;
  I was not sick of any fear from thence:
  But when your countenance fill'd up his line,
  Then lacked I matter; that enfeebled mine.
  Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing,
  And like enough thou know'st thy estimate,
  The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing;
  My bonds in thee are all determinate.
  For how do I hold thee but by thy granting?
  And for that riches where is my deserving?
  The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,
  And so my patent back again is swerving.
  Thy self thou gav'st, thy own worth then not knowing,
  Or me to whom thou gav'st it, else mistaking;
  So thy great gift, upon misprision growing,
  Comes home again, on better judgement making.
  Thus have I had thee, as a dream doth flatter,
  In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.
  When thou shalt be dispos'd to set me light,
  And place my merit in the eye of scorn,
  Upon thy side, against myself I'll fight,
  And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn.
  With mine own weakness, being best acquainted,
  Upon thy part I can set down a story
  Of faults conceal'd, wherein I am attainted;
  That thou in losing me shalt win much glory:
  And I by this will be a gainer too;
  For bending all my loving thoughts on thee,
  The injuries that to myself I do,
  Doing thee vantage, double-vantage me.
  Such is my love, to thee I so belong,
  That for thy right, myself will bear all wrong.
  Say that thou didst forsake me for some fault,
  And I will comment upon that offence:
  Speak of my lameness, and I straight will halt,
  Against thy reasons making no defence.
  Thou canst not love disgrace me half so ill,
  To set a form upon desired change,
  As I'll myself disgrace; knowing thy will,
  I will acquaintance strangle, and look strange;
  Be absent from thy walks; and in my tongue
  Thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell,
  Lest I, too much profane, should do it wrong,
  And haply of our old acquaintance tell.
  For thee, against my self I'll vow debate,
  For I must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate.
  Then hate me when thou wilt; if ever, now;
  Now, while the world is bent my deeds to cross,
  Join with the spite of fortune, make me bow,
  And do not drop in for an after-loss:
  Ah! do not, when my heart hath 'scap'd this sorrow,
  Come in the rearward of a conquer'd woe;
  Give not a windy night a rainy morrow,
  To linger out a purpos'd overthrow.
  If thou wilt leave me, do not leave me last,
  When other petty griefs have done their spite,
  But in the onset come: so shall I taste
  At first the very worst of fortune's might;
  And other strains of woe, which now seem woe,
  Compar'd with loss of thee, will not seem so.
  Some glory in their birth, some in their skill,
  Some in their wealth, some in their body's force,
  Some in their garments though new-fangled ill;
  Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse;
  And every humour hath his adjunct pleasure,
  Wherein it finds a joy above the rest:
  But these particulars are not my measure,
  All these I better in one general best.
  Thy love is better than high birth to me,
  Richer than wealth, prouder than garments' costs,
  Of more delight than hawks and horses be;
  And having thee, of all men's pride I boast:
  Wretched in this alone, that thou mayst take
  All this away, and me most wretchcd make.
  But do thy worst to steal thyself away,
  For term of life thou art assured mine;
  And life no longer than thy love will stay,
  For it depends upon that love of thine.
  Then need I not to fear the worst of wrongs,
  When in the least of them my life hath end.
  I see a better state to me belongs
  Than that which on thy humour doth depend:
  Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind,
  Since that my life on thy revolt doth lie.
  O! what a happy title do I find,
  Happy to have thy love, happy to die!
  But what's so blessed-fair that fears no blot?
  Thou mayst be false, and yet I know it not.
  So shall I live, supposing thou art true,
  Like a deceived husband; so love's face
  May still seem love to me, though alter'd new;
  Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place:
  For there can live no hatred in thine eye,
  Therefore in that I cannot know thy change.
  In many's looks, the false heart's history
  Is writ in moods, and frowns, and wrinkles strange.
  But heaven in thy creation did decree
  That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell;
  Whate'er thy thoughts, or thy heart's workings be,
  Thy looks should nothing thence, but sweetness tell.
  How like Eve's apple doth thy beauty grow,
  If thy sweet virtue answer not thy show!
  They that have power to hurt, and will do none,
  That do not do the thing they most do show,
  Who, moving others, are themselves as stone,
  Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow;
  They rightly do inherit heaven's graces,
  And husband nature's riches from expense;
  They are the lords and owners of their faces,
  Others, but stewards of their excellence.
  The summer's flower is to the summer sweet,
  Though to itself, it only live and die,
  But if that flower with base infection meet,
  The basest weed outbraves his dignity:
  For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds;
  Lilies that fester, smell far worse than weeds.
  How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame
  Which, like a canker in the fragrant rose,
  Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name!
  O! in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose.
  That tongue that tells the story of thy days,
  Making lascivious comments on thy sport,
  Cannot dispraise, but in a kind of praise;
  Naming thy name, blesses an ill report.
  O! what a mansion have those vices got
  Which for their habitation chose out thee,
  Where beauty's veil doth cover every blot
  And all things turns to fair that eyes can see!
  Take heed, dear heart, of this large privilege;
  The hardest knife ill-us'd doth lose his edge.
  Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness;
  Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport;
  Both grace and faults are lov'd of more and less:
  Thou mak'st faults graces that to thee resort.
  As on the finger of a throned queen
  The basest jewel will be well esteem'd,
  So are those errors that in thee are seen
  To truths translated, and for true things deem'd.
  How many lambs might the stern wolf betray,
  If like a lamb he could his looks translate!
  How many gazers mightst thou lead away,
  if thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state!
  But do not so; I love thee in such sort,
  As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.
  How like a winter hath my absence been
  From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!
  What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen!
  What old December's bareness everywhere!
  And yet this time removed was summer's time;
  The teeming autumn, big with rich increase,
  Bearing the wanton burden of the prime,
  Like widow'd wombs after their lords' decease:
  Yet this abundant issue seem'd to me
  But hope of orphans, and unfather'd fruit;
  For summer and his pleasures wait on thee,
  And, thou away, the very birds are mute:
  Or, if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer,
  That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near.
  From you have I been absent in the spring,
  When proud-pied April, dress'd in all his trim,
  Hath put a spirit of youth in every thing,
  That heavy Saturn laugh'd and leap'd with him.
  Yet nor the lays of birds, nor the sweet smell
  Of different flowers in odour and in hue,
  Could make me any summer's story tell,
  Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew:
  Nor did I wonder at the lily's white,
  Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose;
  They were but sweet, but figures of delight,
  Drawn after you, you pattern of all those.
  Yet seem'd it winter still, and you away,
  As with your shadow I with these did play.
  The forward violet thus did I chide:
  Sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells,
  If not from my love's breath? The purple pride
  Which on thy soft cheek for complexion dwells
  In my love's veins thou hast too grossly dy'd.
  The lily I condemned for thy hand,
  And buds of marjoram had stol'n thy hair;
  The roses fearfully on thorns did stand,
  One blushing shame, another white despair;
  A third, nor red nor white, had stol'n of both,
  And to his robbery had annex'd thy breath;
  But, for his theft, in pride of all his growth
  A vengeful canker eat him up to death.
  More flowers I noted, yet I none could see,
  But sweet, or colour it had stol'n from thee.
  Where art thou Muse that thou forget'st so long,
  To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?
  Spend'st thou thy fury on some worthless song,
  Darkening thy power to lend base subjects light?
  Return forgetful Muse, and straight redeem,
  In gentle numbers time so idly spent;
  Sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem
  And gives thy pen both skill and argument.
  Rise, resty Muse, my love's sweet face survey,
  If Time have any wrinkle graven there;
  If any, be a satire to decay,
  And make time's spoils despised every where.
  Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life,
  So thou prevent'st his scythe and crooked knife.
  O truant Muse what shall be thy amends
  For thy neglect of truth in beauty dy'd?
  Both truth and beauty on my love depends;
  So dost thou too, and therein dignified.
  Make answer Muse: wilt thou not haply say,
  'Truth needs no colour, with his colour fix'd;
  Beauty no pencil, beauty's truth to lay;
  But best is best, if never intermix'd'?
  Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb?
  Excuse not silence so, for't lies in thee
  To make him much outlive a gilded tomb
  And to be prais'd of ages yet to be.
  Then do thy office, Muse; I teach thee how
  To make him seem long hence as he shows now.
  My love is strengthen'd, though more weak in seeming;
  I love not less, though less the show appear;
  That love is merchandiz'd, whose rich esteeming,
  The owner's tongue doth publish every where.
  Our love was new, and then but in the spring,
  When I was wont to greet it with my lays;
  As Philomel in summer's front doth sing,
  And stops her pipe in growth of riper days:
  Not that the summer is less pleasant now
  Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night,
  But that wild music burthens every bough,
  And sweets grown common lose their dear delight.
  Therefore like her, I sometime hold my tongue:
  Because I would not dull you with my song.
  Alack! what poverty my Muse brings forth,
  That having such a scope to show her pride,
  The argument, all bare, is of more worth
  Than when it hath my added praise beside!
  O! blame me not, if I no more can write!
  Look in your glass, and there appears a face
  That over-goes my blunt invention quite,
  Dulling my lines, and doing me disgrace.
  Were it not sinful then, striving to mend,
  To mar the subject that before was well?
  For to no other pass my verses tend
  Than of your graces and your gifts to tell;
  And more, much more, than in my verse can sit,
  Your own glass shows you when you look in it.
  To me, fair friend, you never can be old,
  For as you were when first your eye I ey'd,
  Such seems your beauty still. Three winters cold,
  Have from the forests shook three summers' pride,
  Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turn'd,
  In process of the seasons have I seen,
  Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burn'd,
  Since first I saw you fresh, which yet are green.
  Ah! yet doth beauty like a dial-hand,
  Steal from his figure, and no pace perceiv'd;
  So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand,
  Hath motion, and mine eye may be deceiv'd:
  For fear of which, hear this thou age unbred:
  Ere you were born was beauty's summer dead.
  Let not my love be call'd idolatry,
  Nor my beloved as an idol show,
  Since all alike my songs and praises be
  To one, of one, still such, and ever so.
  Kind is my love to-day, to-morrow kind,
  Still constant in a wondrous excellence;
  Therefore my verse to constancy confin'd,
  One thing expressing, leaves out difference.
  'Fair, kind, and true,' is all my argument,
  'Fair, kind, and true,' varying to other words;
  And in this change is my invention spent,
  Three themes in one, which wondrous scope affords.
  Fair, kind, and true, have often liv'd alone,
  Which three till now, never kept seat in one.
  When in the chronicle of wasted time
  I see descriptions of the fairest wights,
  And beauty making beautiful old rime,
  In praise of ladies dead and lovely knights,
  Then, in the blazon of sweet beauty's best,
  Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow,
  I see their antique pen would have express'd
  Even such a beauty as you master now.
  So all their praises are but prophecies
  Of this our time, all you prefiguring;
  And for they looked but with divining eyes,
  They had not skill enough your worth to sing:
  For we, which now behold these present days,
  Have eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise.
  Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul
  Of the wide world dreaming on things to come,
  Can yet the lease of my true love control,
  Supposed as forfeit to a confin'd doom.
  The mortal moon hath her eclipse endur'd,
  And the sad augurs mock their own presage;
  Incertainties now crown themselves assur'd,
  And peace proclaims olives of endless age.
  Now with the drops of this most balmy time,
  My love looks fresh, and Death to me subscribes,
  Since, spite of him, I'll live in this poor rime,
  While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes:
  And thou in this shalt find thy monument,
  When tyrants' crests and tombs of brass are spent.
  What's in the brain, that ink may character,
  Which hath not figur'd to thee my true spirit?
  What's new to speak, what now to register,
  That may express my love, or thy dear merit?
  Nothing, sweet boy; but yet, like prayers divine,
  I must each day say o'er the very same;
  Counting no old thing old, thou mine, I thine,
  Even as when first I hallow'd thy fair name.
  So that eternal love in love's fresh case,
  Weighs not the dust and injury of age,
  Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place,
  But makes antiquity for aye his page;
  Finding the first conceit of love there bred,
  Where time and outward form would show it dead.
  O! never say that I was false of heart,
  Though absence seem'd my flame to qualify,
  As easy might I from my self depart
  As from my soul which in thy breast doth lie:
  That is my home of love: if I have rang'd,
  Like him that travels, I return again;
  Just to the time, not with the time exchang'd,
  So that myself bring water for my stain.
  Never believe though in my nature reign'd,
  All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood,
  That it could so preposterously be stain'd,
  To leave for nothing all thy sum of good;
  For nothing this wide universe I call,
  Save thou, my rose, in it thou art my all.
  Alas! 'tis true, I have gone here and there,
  And made my self a motley to the view,
  Gor'd mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear,
  Made old offences of affections new;
  Most true it is, that I have look'd on truth
  Askance and strangely; but, by all above,
  These blenches gave my heart another youth,
  And worse essays prov'd thee my best of love.
  Now all is done, save what shall have no end:
  Mine appetite I never more will grind
  On newer proof, to try an older friend,
  A god in love, to whom I am confin'd.
  Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best,
  Even to thy pure and most most loving breast.
  O! for my sake do you with Fortune chide,
  The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds,
  That did not better for my life provide
  Than public means which public manners breeds.
  Thence comes it that my name receives a brand,
  And almost thence my nature is subdu'd
  To what it works in, like the dyer's hand:
  Pity me, then, and wish I were renew'd;
  Whilst, like a willing patient, I will drink,
  Potions of eisel 'gainst my strong infection;
  No bitterness that I will bitter think,
  Nor double penance, to correct correction.
  Pity me then, dear friend, and I assure ye,
  Even that your pity is enough to cure me.
  Your love and pity doth the impression fill,
  Which vulgar scandal stamp'd upon my brow;
  For what care I who calls me well or ill,
  So you o'er-green my bad, my good allow?
  You are my all-the-world, and I must strive
  To know my shames and praises from your tongue;
  None else to me, nor I to none alive,
  That my steel'd sense or changes right or wrong.
  In so profound abysm I throw all care
  Of others' voices, that my adder's sense
  To critic and to flatterer stopped are.
  Mark how with my neglect I do dispense:
  You are so strongly in my purpose bred,
  That all the world besides methinks are dead.
  Since I left you, mine eye is in my mind;
  And that which governs me to go about
  Doth part his function and is partly blind,
  Seems seeing, but effectually is out;
  For it no form delivers to the heart
  Of bird, of flower, or shape which it doth latch:
  Of his quick objects hath the mind no part,
  Nor his own vision holds what it doth catch;
  For if it see the rud'st or gentlest sight,
  The most sweet favour or deformed'st creature,
  The mountain or the sea, the day or night:
  The crow, or dove, it shapes them to your feature.
  Incapable of more, replete with you,
  My most true mind thus maketh mine untrue.
  Or whether doth my mind, being crown'd with you,
  Drink up the monarch's plague, this flattery?
  Or whether shall I say, mine eye saith true,
  And that your love taught it this alchemy,
  To make of monsters and things indigest
  Such cherubins as your sweet self resemble,
  Creating every bad a perfect best,
  As fast as objects to his beams assemble?
  O! 'tis the first, 'tis flattery in my seeing,
  And my great mind most kingly drinks it up:
  Mine eye well knows what with his gust is 'greeing,
  And to his palate doth prepare the cup:
  If it be poison'd, 'tis the lesser sin
  That mine eye loves it and doth first begin.
  Those lines that I before have writ do lie,
  Even those that said I could not love you dearer:
  Yet then my judgment knew no reason why
  My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer.
  But reckoning Time, whose million'd accidents
  Creep in 'twixt vows, and change decrees of kings,
  Tan sacred beauty, blunt the sharp'st intents,
  Divert strong minds to the course of altering things;
  Alas! why fearing of Time's tyranny,
  Might I not then say, 'Now I love you best,'
  When I was certain o'er incertainty,
  Crowning the present, doubting of the rest?
  Love is a babe, then might I not say so,
  To give full growth to that which still doth grow?
  Let me not to the marriage of true minds
  Admit impediments. Love is not love
  Which alters when it alteration finds,
  Or bends with the remover to remove:
  O, no! it is an ever-fixed mark,
  That looks on tempests and is never shaken;
  It is the star to every wandering bark,
  Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken.
  Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks
  Within his bending sickle's compass come;
  Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,
  But bears it out even to the edge of doom.
  If this be error and upon me prov'd,
  I never writ, nor no man ever lov'd.
  Accuse me thus: that I have scanted all,
  Wherein I should your great deserts repay,
  Forgot upon your dearest love to call,
  Whereto all bonds do tie me day by day;
  That I have frequent been with unknown minds,
  And given to time your own dear-purchas'd right;
  That I have hoisted sail to all the winds
  Which should transport me farthest from your sight.
  Book both my wilfulness and errors down,
  And on just proof surmise, accumulate;
  Bring me within the level of your frown,
  But shoot not at me in your waken'd hate;
  Since my appeal says I did strive to prove
  The constancy and virtue of your love.
  Like as, to make our appetite more keen,
  With eager compounds we our palate urge;
  As, to prevent our maladies unseen,
  We sicken to shun sickness when we purge;
  Even so, being full of your ne'er-cloying sweetness,
  To bitter sauces did I frame my feeding;
  And, sick of welfare, found a kind of meetness
  To be diseas'd, ere that there was true needing.
  Thus policy in love, to anticipate
  The ills that were not, grew to faults assur'd,
  And brought to medicine a healthful state
  Which, rank of goodness, would by ill be cur'd;
  But thence I learn and find the lesson true,
  Drugs poison him that so fell sick of you.
  What potions have I drunk of Siren tears,
  Distill'd from limbecks foul as hell within,
  Applying fears to hopes, and hopes to fears,
  Still losing when I saw myself to win!
  What wretched errors hath my heart committed,
  Whilst it hath thought itself so blessed never!
  How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted,
  In the distraction of this madding fever!
  O benefit of ill! now I find true
  That better is, by evil still made better;
  And ruin'd love, when it is built anew,
  Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater.
  So I return rebuk'd to my content,
  And gain by ill thrice more than I have spent.
  That you were once unkind befriends me now,
  And for that sorrow, which I then did feel,
  Needs must I under my transgression bow,
  Unless my nerves were brass or hammer'd steel.
  For if you were by my unkindness shaken,
  As I by yours, you've pass'd a hell of time;
  And I, a tyrant, have no leisure taken
  To weigh how once I suffer'd in your crime.
  O! that our night of woe might have remember'd
  My deepest sense, how hard true sorrow hits,
  And soon to you, as you to me, then tender'd
  The humble salve, which wounded bosoms fits!
  But that your trespass now becomes a fee;
  Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me.
  'Tis better to be vile than vile esteem'd,
  When not to be receives reproach of being;
  And the just pleasure lost, which is so deem'd
  Not by our feeling, but by others' seeing:
  For why should others' false adulterate eyes
  Give salutation to my sportive blood?
  Or on my frailties why are frailer spies,
  Which in their wills count bad what I think good?
  No, I am that I am, and they that level
  At my abuses reckon up their own:
  I may be straight though they themselves be bevel;
  By their rank thoughts, my deeds must not be shown;
  Unless this general evil they maintain,
  All men are bad and in their badness reign.
  Thy gift, thy tables, are within my brain
  Full character'd with lasting memory,
  Which shall above that idle rank remain,
  Beyond all date; even to eternity:
  Or, at the least, so long as brain and heart
  Have faculty by nature to subsist;
  Till each to raz'd oblivion yield his part
  Of thee, thy record never can be miss'd.
  That poor retention could not so much hold,
  Nor need I tallies thy dear love to score;
  Therefore to give them from me was I bold,
  To trust those tables that receive thee more:
  To keep an adjunct to remember thee
  Were to import forgetfulness in me.
  No, Time, thou shalt not boast that I do change:
  Thy pyramids built up with newer might
  To me are nothing novel, nothing strange;
  They are but dressings of a former sight.
  Our dates are brief, and therefore we admire
  What thou dost foist upon us that is old;
  And rather make them born to our desire
  Than think that we before have heard them told.
  Thy registers and thee I both defy,
  Not wondering at the present nor the past,
  For thy records and what we see doth lie,
  Made more or less by thy continual haste.
  This I do vow and this shall ever be;
  I will be true despite thy scythe and thee.
  If my dear love were but the child of state,
  It might for Fortune's bastard be unfather'd,
  As subject to Time's love or to Time's hate,
  Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gather'd.
  No, it was builded far from accident;
  It suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls
  Under the blow of thralled discontent,
  Whereto th' inviting time our fashion calls:
  It fears not policy, that heretic,
  Which works on leases of short-number'd hours,
  But all alone stands hugely politic,
  That it nor grows with heat, nor drowns with showers.
  To this I witness call the fools of time,
  Which die for goodness, who have lived for crime.
  Were't aught to me I bore the canopy,
  With my extern the outward honouring,
  Or laid great bases for eternity,
  Which proves more short than waste or ruining?
  Have I not seen dwellers on form and favour
  Lose all and more by paying too much rent
  For compound sweet; forgoing simple savour,
  Pitiful thrivers, in their gazing spent?
  No; let me be obsequious in thy heart,
  And take thou my oblation, poor but free,
  Which is not mix'd with seconds, knows no art,
  But mutual render, only me for thee.
  Hence, thou suborned informer! a true soul
  When most impeach'd, stands least in thy control.
  O thou, my lovely boy, who in thy power
  Dost hold Time's fickle glass, his fickle hour;
  Who hast by waning grown, and therein show'st
  Thy lovers withering, as thy sweet self grow'st.
  If Nature, sovereign mistress over wrack,
  As thou goest onwards, still will pluck thee back,
  She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill
  May time disgrace and wretched minutes kill.
  Yet fear her, O thou minion of her pleasure!
  She may detain, but not still keep, her treasure:
  Her audit (though delayed) answered must be,
  And her quietus is to render thee.
  In the old age black was not counted fair,
  Or if it were, it bore not beauty's name;
  But now is black beauty's successive heir,
  And beauty slander'd with a bastard shame:
  For since each hand hath put on Nature's power,
  Fairing the foul with Art's false borrowed face,
  Sweet beauty hath no name, no holy bower,
  But is profan'd, if not lives in disgrace.
  Therefore my mistress' eyes are raven black,
  Her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem
  At such who, not born fair, no beauty lack,
  Sland'ring creation with a false esteem:
  Yet so they mourn becoming of their woe,
  That every tongue says beauty should look so.
  How oft when thou, my music, music play'st,
  Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds
  With thy sweet fingers when thou gently sway'st
  The wiry concord that mine ear confounds,
  Do I envy those jacks that nimble leap,
  To kiss the tender inward of thy hand,
  Whilst my poor lips which should that harvest reap,
  At the wood's boldness by thee blushing stand!
  To be so tickled, they would change their state
  And situation with those dancing chips,
  O'er whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait,
  Making dead wood more bless'd than living lips.
  Since saucy jacks so happy are in this,
  Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss.
  The expense of spirit in a waste of shame
  Is lust in action: and till action, lust
  Is perjur'd, murderous, bloody, full of blame,
  Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust;
  Enjoy'd no sooner but despised straight;
  Past reason hunted; and no sooner had,
  Past reason hated, as a swallow'd bait,
  On purpose laid to make the taker mad:
  Mad in pursuit and in possession so;
  Had, having, and in quest, to have extreme;
  A bliss in proof,-- and prov'd, a very woe;
  Before, a joy propos'd; behind a dream.
  All this the world well knows; yet none knows well
  To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.
  My mistress' eyes are nothing like the sun;
  Coral is far more red, than her lips red:
  If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun;
  If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head.
  I have seen roses damask'd, red and white,
  But no such roses see I in her cheeks;
  And in some perfumes is there more delight
  Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.
  I love to hear her speak, yet well I know
  That music hath a far more pleasing sound:
  I grant I never saw a goddess go,--
  My mistress, when she walks, treads on the ground:
  And yet by heaven, I think my love as rare,
  As any she belied with false compare.
  Thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art,
  As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel;
  For well thou know'st to my dear doting heart
  Thou art the fairest and most precious jewel.
  Yet, in good faith, some say that thee behold,
  Thy face hath not the power to make love groan;
  To say they err I dare not be so bold,
  Although I swear it to myself alone.
  And to be sure that is not false I swear,
  A thousand groans, but thinking on thy face,
  One on another's neck, do witness bear
  Thy black is fairest in my judgment's place.
  In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds,
  And thence this slander, as I think, proceeds.
  Thine eyes I love, and they, as pitying me,
  Knowing thy heart torment me with disdain,
  Have put on black and loving mourners be,
  Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain.
  And truly not the morning sun of heaven
  Better becomes the grey cheeks of the east,
  Nor that full star that ushers in the even,
  Doth half that glory to the sober west,
  As those two mourning eyes become thy face:
  O! let it then as well beseem thy heart
  To mourn for me since mourning doth thee grace,
  And suit thy pity like in every part.
  Then will I swear beauty herself is black,
  And all they foul that thy complexion lack.
  Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan
  For that deep wound it gives my friend and me!
  Is't not enough to torture me alone,
  But slave to slavery my sweet'st friend must be?
  Me from myself thy cruel eye hath taken,
  And my next self thou harder hast engross'd:
  Of him, myself, and thee I am forsaken;
  A torment thrice three-fold thus to be cross'd:
  Prison my heart in thy steel bosom's ward,
  But then my friend's heart let my poor heart bail;
  Whoe'er keeps me, let my heart be his guard;
  Thou canst not then use rigour in my jail:
  And yet thou wilt; for I, being pent in thee,
  Perforce am thine, and all that is in me.
  So, now I have confess'd that he is thine,
  And I my self am mortgag'd to thy will,
  Myself I'll forfeit, so that other mine
  Thou wilt restore to be my comfort still:
  But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free,
  For thou art covetous, and he is kind;
  He learn'd but surety-like to write for me,
  Under that bond that him as fast doth bind.
  The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take,
  Thou usurer, that putt'st forth all to use,
  And sue a friend came debtor for my sake;
  So him I lose through my unkind abuse.
  Him have I lost; thou hast both him and me:
  He pays the whole, and yet am I not free.
  Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy 'Will,'
  And 'Will' to boot, and 'Will' in over-plus;
  More than enough am I that vex'd thee still,
  To thy sweet will making addition thus.
  Wilt thou, whose will is large and spacious,
  Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine?
  Shall will in others seem right gracious,
  And in my will no fair acceptance shine?
  The sea, all water, yet receives rain still,
  And in abundance addeth to his store;
  So thou, being rich in 'Will,' add to thy 'Will'
  One will of mine, to make thy large will more.
  Let no unkind 'No' fair beseechers kill;
  Think all but one, and me in that one 'Will.'
  If thy soul check thee that I come so near,
  Swear to thy blind soul that I was thy 'Will',
  And will, thy soul knows, is admitted there;
  Thus far for love, my love-suit, sweet, fulfil.
  'Will', will fulfil the treasure of thy love,
  Ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one.
  In things of great receipt with ease we prove
  Among a number one is reckon'd none:
  Then in the number let me pass untold,
  Though in thy store's account I one must be;
  For nothing hold me, so it please thee hold
  That nothing me, a something sweet to thee:
  Make but my name thy love, and love that still,
  And then thou lov'st me for my name is 'Will.'
  Thou blind fool, Love, what dost thou to mine eyes,
  That they behold, and see not what they see?
  They know what beauty is, see where it lies,
  Yet what the best is take the worst to be.
  If eyes, corrupt by over-partial looks,
  Be anchor'd in the bay where all men ride,
  Why of eyes' falsehood hast thou forged hooks,
  Whereto the judgment of my heart is tied?
  Why should my heart think that a several plot,
  Which my heart knows the wide world's common place?
  Or mine eyes, seeing this, say this is not,
  To put fair truth upon so foul a face?
  In things right true my heart and eyes have err'd,
  And to this false plague are they now transferr'd.
  When my love swears that she is made of truth,
  I do believe her though I know she lies,
  That she might think me some untutor'd youth,
  Unlearned in the world's false subtleties.
  Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,
  Although she knows my days are past the best,
  Simply I credit her false-speaking tongue:
  On both sides thus is simple truth suppressed:
  But wherefore says she not she is unjust?
  And wherefore say not I that I am old?
  O! love's best habit is in seeming trust,
  And age in love, loves not to have years told:
  Therefore I lie with her, and she with me,
  And in our faults by lies we flatter'd be.
  O! call not me to justify the wrong
  That thy unkindness lays upon my heart;
  Wound me not with thine eye, but with thy tongue:
  Use power with power, and slay me not by art,
  Tell me thou lov'st elsewhere; but in my sight,
  Dear heart, forbear to glance thine eye aside:
  What need'st thou wound with cunning, when thy might
  Is more than my o'erpress'd defence can bide?
  Let me excuse thee: ah! my love well knows
  Her pretty looks have been mine enemies;
  And therefore from my face she turns my foes,
  That they elsewhere might dart their injuries:
  Yet do not so; but since I am near slain,
  Kill me outright with looks, and rid my pain.
  Be wise as thou art cruel; do not press
  My tongue-tied patience with too much disdain;
  Lest sorrow lend me words, and words express
  The manner of my pity-wanting pain.
  If I might teach thee wit, better it were,
  Though not to love, yet, love to tell me so;--
  As testy sick men, when their deaths be near,
  No news but health from their physicians know;--
  For, if I should despair, I should grow mad,
  And in my madness might speak ill of thee;
  Now this ill-wresting world is grown so bad,
  Mad slanderers by mad ears believed be.
  That I may not be so, nor thou belied,
  Bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide.
  In faith I do not love thee with mine eyes,
  For they in thee a thousand errors note;
  But 'tis my heart that loves what they despise,
  Who, in despite of view, is pleased to dote.
  Nor are mine ears with thy tongue's tune delighted;
  Nor tender feeling, to base touches prone,
  Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be invited
  To any sensual feast with thee alone:
  But my five wits nor my five senses can
  Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee,
  Who leaves unsway'd the likeness of a man,
  Thy proud heart's slave and vassal wretch to be:
  Only my plague thus far I count my gain,
  That she that makes me sin awards me pain.
  Love is my sin, and thy dear virtue hate,
  Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving:
  O! but with mine compare thou thine own state,
  And thou shalt find it merits not reproving;
  Or, if it do, not from those lips of thine,
  That have profan'd their scarlet ornaments
  And seal'd false bonds of love as oft as mine,
  Robb'd others' beds' revenues of their rents.
  Be it lawful I love thee, as thou lov'st those
  Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee:
  Root pity in thy heart, that, when it grows,
  Thy pity may deserve to pitied be.
  If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide,
  By self-example mayst thou be denied!
  Lo, as a careful housewife runs to catch
  One of her feather'd creatures broke away,
  Sets down her babe, and makes all swift dispatch
  In pursuit of the thing she would have stay;
  Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase,
  Cries to catch her whose busy care is bent
  To follow that which flies before her face,
  Not prizing her poor infant's discontent;
  So runn'st thou after that which flies from thee,
  Whilst I thy babe chase thee afar behind;
  But if thou catch thy hope, turn back to me,
  And play the mother's part, kiss me, be kind;
  So will I pray that thou mayst have thy 'Will,'
  If thou turn back and my loud crying still.
  Two loves I have of comfort and despair,
  Which like two spirits do suggest me still:
  The better angel is a man right fair,
  The worser spirit a woman colour'd ill.
  To win me soon to hell, my female evil,
  Tempteth my better angel from my side,
  And would corrupt my saint to be a devil,
  Wooing his purity with her foul pride.
  And whether that my angel be turn'd fiend,
  Suspect I may, yet not directly tell;
  But being both from me, both to each friend,
  I guess one angel in another's hell:
  Yet this shall I ne'er know, but live in doubt,
  Till my bad angel fire my good one out.
  Those lips that Love's own hand did make,
  Breathed forth the sound that said 'I hate',
  To me that languish'd for her sake:
  But when she saw my woeful state,
  Straight in her heart did mercy come,
  Chiding that tongue that ever sweet
  Was us'd in giving gentle doom;
  And taught it thus anew to greet;
  'I hate' she alter'd with an end,
  That followed it as gentle day,
  Doth follow night, who like a fiend
  From heaven to hell is flown away.
  'I hate', from hate away she threw,
  And sav'd my life, saying 'not you'.
  Poor soul, the centre of my sinful earth,
  My sinful earth these rebel powers array,
  Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth,
  Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?
  Why so large cost, having so short a lease,
  Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend?
  Shall worms, inheritors of this excess,
  Eat up thy charge? Is this thy body's end?
  Then soul, live thou upon thy servant's loss,
  And let that pine to aggravate thy store;
  Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross;
  Within be fed, without be rich no more:
  So shall thou feed on Death, that feeds on men,
  And Death once dead, there's no more dying then.
  My love is as a fever longing still,
  For that which longer nurseth the disease;
  Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill,
  The uncertain sickly appetite to please.
  My reason, the physician to my love,
  Angry that his prescriptions are not kept,
  Hath left me, and I desperate now approve
  Desire is death, which physic did except.
  Past cure I am, now Reason is past care,
  And frantic-mad with evermore unrest;
  My thoughts and my discourse as madmen's are,
  At random from the truth vainly express'd;
  For I have sworn thee fair, and thought thee bright,
  Who art as black as hell, as dark as night.
  O me! what eyes hath Love put in my head,
  Which have no correspondence with true sight;
  Or, if they have, where is my judgment fled,
  That censures falsely what they see aright?
  If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote,
  What means the world to say it is not so?
  If it be not, then love doth well denote
  Love's eye is not so true as all men's: no,
  How can it? O! how can Love's eye be true,
  That is so vexed with watching and with tears?
  No marvel then, though I mistake my view;
  The sun itself sees not, till heaven clears.
  O cunning Love! with tears thou keep'st me blind,
  Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find.
  Canst thou, O cruel! say I love thee not,
  When I against myself with thee partake?
  Do I not think on thee, when I forgot
  Am of my self, all tyrant, for thy sake?
  Who hateth thee that I do call my friend,
  On whom frown'st thou that I do fawn upon,
  Nay, if thou lour'st on me, do I not spend
  Revenge upon myself with present moan?
  What merit do I in my self respect,
  That is so proud thy service to despise,
  When all my best doth worship thy defect,
  Commanded by the motion of thine eyes?
  But, love, hate on, for now I know thy mind;
  Those that can see thou lov'st, and I am blind.
  O! from what power hast thou this powerful might,
  With insufficiency my heart to sway?
  To make me give the lie to my true sight,
  And swear that brightness doth not grace the day?
  Whence hast thou this becoming of things ill,
  That in the very refuse of thy deeds
  There is such strength and warrantise of skill,
  That, in my mind, thy worst all best exceeds?
  Who taught thee how to make me love thee more,
  The more I hear and see just cause of hate?
  O! though I love what others do abhor,
  With others thou shouldst not abhor my state:
  If thy unworthiness rais'd love in me,
  More worthy I to be belov'd of thee.
  Love is too young to know what conscience is,
  Yet who knows not conscience is born of love?
  Then, gentle cheater, urge not my amiss,
  Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove:
  For, thou betraying me, I do betray
  My nobler part to my gross body's treason;
  My soul doth tell my body that he may
  Triumph in love; flesh stays no farther reason,
  But rising at thy name doth point out thee,
  As his triumphant prize. Proud of this pride,
  He is contented thy poor drudge to be,
  To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side.
  No want of conscience hold it that I call
  Her 'love,' for whose dear love I rise and fall.
  In loving thee thou know'st I am forsworn,
  But thou art twice forsworn, to me love swearing;
  In act thy bed-vow broke, and new faith torn,
  In vowing new hate after new love bearing:
  But why of two oaths' breach do I accuse thee,
  When I break twenty? I am perjur'd most;
  For all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee,
  And all my honest faith in thee is lost:
  For I have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness,
  Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy;
  And, to enlighten thee, gave eyes to blindness,
  Or made them swear against the thing they see;
  For I have sworn thee fair; more perjur'd I,
  To swear against the truth so foul a lie!
  Cupid laid by his brand and fell asleep:
  A maid of Dian's this advantage found,
  And his love-kindling fire did quickly steep
  In a cold valley-fountain of that ground;
  Which borrow'd from this holy fire of Love,
  A dateless lively heat, still to endure,
  And grew a seeting bath, which yet men prove
  Against strange maladies a sovereign cure.
  But at my mistress' eye Love's brand new-fired,
  The boy for trial needs would touch my breast;
  I, sick withal, the help of bath desired,
  And thither hied, a sad distemper'd guest,
  But found no cure, the bath for my help lies
  Where Cupid got new fire; my mistress' eyes.
  The little Love-god lying once asleep,
  Laid by his side his heart-inflaming brand,
  Whilst many nymphs that vow'd chaste life to keep
  Came tripping by; but in her maiden hand
  The fairest votary took up that fire
  Which many legions of true hearts had warm'd;
  And so the general of hot desire
  Was, sleeping, by a virgin hand disarm'd.
  This brand she quenched in a cool well by,
  Which from Love's fire took heat perpetual,
  Growing a bath and healthful remedy,
  For men diseas'd; but I, my mistress' thrall,
  Came there for cure and this by that I prove,
  Love's fire heats water, water cools not love.
  And, after all, it is to them we return.
  Their triumph is to rise and be our hosts:
  lords of unquiet or of quiet sojourn,
  those muddy-hued and midge-tormented ghosts.
  On blustery lilac-bush and terrace-urn
  bedaubed with bloom Linnaean pentecosts
  put their pronged light; the chilly fountains burn.
  Religion of the heart, with trysts and quests
  and pangs of consolation, its hawks hood
  twitched off for sweet carnality, again
  rejoices in old hymns of servitude,
  haunting the sacred well, the hidden shrine.
  It is the ravage of the heron wood;
  it is the rood blazing upon the green.
  November rips gold foil from the oak ridges.
  Dour folk huddle in High Hoyland, Penistone.
  The tributaries of the Sheaf and Don
  bulge their dull spate, cramming the poor bridges.
  The North Sea batters our shepherds cottages
  from sixty miles. No sooner has the sun
  swung clear above earths rim than it is gone.
  We live like gleaners of its vestiges
  knowing we flourish, though each year a child
  with the set face of a tomb-weeper is put down
  for ever and ever. Why does the air grow cold
  in the region of mirrors? And who is this clown
  doffing his mask at the masked threshold
  to selfless raptures that are all his own?
  High voices in domestic chapels; praise;
  praise-worthy feuds; new-burgeoned spires that sprung
  crisp-leaved as though from dropping-wells. The young
  ferns root among our vitrified tears.
  What an elopement that was: the hired chaise
  tore through the fir-grove, scattered kinsmen flung
  buckshot and bridles, and the tocsin swung
  from the tarred bellcote dappled with dove-smears.
  Wires tarnish in gilt corridors, in each room
  stiff with the bric-a-brac of loss and gain.
  Love fled, truly outwitted, through a swirl
  of long-laid dust. Today you sip and smile
  though still not quite yourself. Guarding its pane
  the spider looms against another storm.
  Make miniatures of the once-monstrous theme:
  the red-coat devotees, melees of wheels,
  Jagannaths lovers. With indifferent aim
  unleash the rutting cannon at the walls
  of forts and palaces; pollute the wells.
  Impound the memoirs for their bankrupt shame,
  fantasies of true destiny that kills
  under the sanction of the English name.
  Be moved by faith, obedience without fault,
  the flawless hubris of heroic guilt,
  the grace of visitation; and be stirred
  by all her god-quests, her idolatries,
  in conclave of abiding injuries,
  sated upon the stillness of the bride.
  Suppose they sweltered here three thousand years
  patient for our destruction. There is a greeting
  beyond the act. Destiny is the great thing,
  true lord of annexation and arrears.
  Our law-books overrule the emperors.
  The mango is the bride-bed of light. Spring
  jostles the flame-tree. But new mandates bring
  new images of faith, good subahdars!
  The flittering candles of the wayside shrines
  melt into dawn. The sun surmounts the dust.
  Krishna from Radha lovingly untwines.
  Lugging the earth, the oxen bow their heads.
  The alien conscience of our days is lost
  among the ruins and on endless roads.
  Malcolm and Frere, Colebrooke and Elphinstone,
  the life of empire like the life of the mind
  simple, sensuous, passionate, attuned
  to the clear theme of justice and order, gone.
  Gone the ascetic pastimes, the Persian
  scholarship, the wild boar run to ground,
  the watercolours of the sun and wind.
  Names rise like outcrops on the rich terrain,
  like carapaces of the Mughal tombs
  lop-sided in the rice-fields, boarded-up
  near railway-crossings and small aerodromes.
  Indias a peacock-shrine next to a shop
  selling mangola, sitars, lucky charms,
  heavenly Buddhas smiling in their sleep.
  Pitched high above the shallows of the sea
  lone bells in gritty belfries do not ring
  but coil a far and inward echoing
  out of the air that thrums. Enduringly,
  fuchsia-hedges fend between cliff and sky;
  brown stumps of headstones tamp into the ling
  the ruined and the ruinously strong.
  Platonic England grasps its tenantry
  where wild-eyed poppies raddle tawny farms
  and wild swans root in lily-clouded lakes.
  Vulnerable to each other the twin forms
  of sleep and waking touch the man who wakes
  to sudden light, who thinks that this becalms
  even the phantoms of untold mistakes.
  While friends defected, you stayed and were sure,
  fervent in reason, watchful of each name:
  a signet-seals unostentatious gem
  gleams against walnut on the escritoire,
  focus of reckoning and judicious prayer.
  This is the durable covenant, a room
  quietly furnished with stuff of martyrdom,
  lit by the flowers and moths from your own shire,
  by silvery vistas frothed with convolvulus;
  radiance of dreams hardly to be denied.
  The twittering pipistrelle, so strange and close,
  plucks its curt flight through the moist eventide;
  the children thread among old avenues
  of snowberries, clear-calling as they fade.
  Autumn resumes the land, ruffles the woods
  with smoky wings, entangles them. Trees shine
  out from their leaves, rocks mildew to moss-green;
  the avenues are spread with brittle floods.
  Platonic England, house of solitudes,
  rests in its laurels and its injured stone,
  replete with complex fortunes that are gone,
  beset by dynasties of moods and clouds.
  It stands, as though at ease with its own world,
  the mannerly extortions, languid praise,
  all that devotion long since bought and sold,
  the rooms of cedar and soft-thudding baize,
  tremulous boudoirs where the crystals kissed
  in cabinets of amethyst and frost.
  Remember how, at seven years, the decrees
  were brought home: child-soul must register
  for Christs dole, be allotted its first Easter,
  blanch-white and empty, chilled by the lilies,
  betrothed among the well-wishers and spies.
  Reverend Mother, breakfastless, could feast her
  constraint on terracotta and alabaster
  and brimstone and the sweets of paradise.
  Theology makes good bedside reading. Some
  who are lost covet scholastic proof,
  subsistence of probation, modest balm.
  The wooden wings of justice borne aloof,
  we close our eyes to Anselm and lie calm.
  All night the cisterns whisper in the roof.
  The pigeon purrs in the wood; the wood has gone;
  dark leaves that flick to silver in the gust,
  and the marsh-orchids and the herons nest,
  goldgrimy shafts and pillars of the sun.
  Weightless magnificence upholds the past.
  Cement recesses smell of fur and bone
  and berries wrinkle in the badger-run
  and wiry heath-fern scatters its fresh rust.
  O clap your hands so that the dove takes flight,
  bursts through the leaves with an untidy sound,
  plunges its wings into the green twilight
  above this long-sought and forsaken ground,
  the half-built ruins of the new estate,
  warheads of mushrooms round the filter-pond.
  Stroke the small silk with your whispering hands,
  godmother; nod and nod from the half-gloom;
  broochlight intermittent between the fronds,
  the owl immortal in its crystal dome.
  Along the mantelpiece veined lustres trill,
  the clock discounts us with a telling chime.
  Familiar ministrants, clerks-of-appeal,
  burnish upon the threshold of the dream:
  churchwardens in wing-collars bearing scrolls
  of copyhold well-tinctured and well-tied.
  Your photo-albums loved by the boy-king
  preserve in sepia waterglass the souls
  of distant cousins, virgin till they died,
  and the lost delicate suitors who could sing.
  So to celebrate that kingdom: it grows
  greener in winter, essence of the year;
  the apple-branches musty with green fur.
  In the viridian darkness of its yews
  it is an enclave of perpetual vows
  broken in time. Its truth shows disrepair,
  disfigured shrines, their stones of gossamer,
  Old Moores astrology, all hallows,
  the squires effigy bewigged with frost,
  and hobnails cracking puddles before dawn.
  In grange and cottage girls rise from their beds
  by candlelight and mend their ruined braids.
  Touched by the cry of the iconoclast,
  how the rose-window blossoms with the sun!
  Nightingale, that on yon bloomy Spray
  Warbl'st at eeve, when all the Woods are still,
  Thou with fresh hope the Lovers heart dost fill,
  While the jolly hours lead on propitious May,
  Thy liquid notes that close the eye of Day,
  First heard before the shallow Cuccoo's bill
  Portend success in love; O if Jove's will
  Have linkt that amorous power to thy soft lay,
  Now timely sing, ere the rude Bird of Hate
  Foretell my hopeles doom in som Grove ny:                            
  As thou from yeer to yeer hast sung too late
  For my relief; yet hadst no reason why,
  Whether the Muse, or Love call thee his mate,
  Both them I serve, and of their train am I.
  Donna leggiadra il cui bel nome honora
  L'herbosa val di Rheno, e il nobil varco,
  Ben e colui d'ogni valore scarco
  Qual tuo spirto gentil non innamora,
  Che dolcemente mostra si di fuora
  De suoi atti soavi giamai parco,
  E i don', che son d'amor saette ed arco,
  La onde l' alta tua virtu s'infiora.
  Quando tu vaga parli, O lieta canti
  Che mover possa duro alpestre legno,                                 
  Guardi ciascun a gli occhi ed a gli orecchi
  L'entrata, chi di te si truova indegno;
  Gratia sola di su gli vaglia, inanti
  Che'l disio amoroso al cuor s'invecchi.
  Qual in colle aspro, al imbrunir di sera
  L'avezza giovinetta pastorella
  Va bagnando l'herbetta strana e bella
  Che mal si spande a disusata spera
  Fuor di sua natia alma primavera,
  Cosi Amor meco insu la lingua snella
  Desta il fior novo di strania favella,
  Mentre io di te, vezzosamente altera,
  Canto, dal mio buon popol non inteso
  E'l bel Tamigi cangio col bel Arno                                   
  Amor lo volse, ed io a l'altrui peso
  Seppi ch' Amor cosa mai volse indarno.
  Deh!  foss' il mio cuor lento e'l duro seno
  A chi pianta dal ciel si buon terreno.
  Ridonsi donne e giovani amorosi
  M' occostandosi attorno, e perche scrivi,
  Perche tu scrivi in lingua ignota e strana
  Verseggiando d'amor, e come t'osi?
  Dinne, se la tua speme sia mai vana
  E de pensieri lo miglior t' arrivi;
  Cosi mi van burlando, altri rivi
  Altri lidi t' aspettan, & altre onde
  Nelle cui verdi sponde
  Spuntati ad hor, ad hor a la tua chioma                              
  L'immortal guiderdon d 'eterne frondi
  Perche alle spalle tue soverchia soma?
  Canzon dirotti, e tu per me rispondi
  Dice mia Donna, e'l suo dir, e il mio cuore
  Questa e lingua di cui si vanta Amore.
  Diodati, e te'l diro con maraviglia,
  Quel ritroso io ch'amor spreggiar solea
  E de suoi lacci spesso mi ridea
  Gia caddi, ov'huom dabben talhor s'impiglia.
  Ne treccie d'oro, ne guancia vermiglia
  M' abbaglian si, ma sotto nova idea
  Pellegrina bellezza che'l cuor bea,
  Portamenti alti honesti, e nelle ciglia
  Quel sereno fulgor d' amabil nero,
  Parole adorne di lingua piu d'una,                                   
  E'l cantar che di mezzo l'hemispero
  Traviar ben puo la faticosa Luna,
  E degil occhi suoi auventa si gran fuoco
  Che l 'incerar gli oreechi mi fia poco.
  Per certo i bei vostr'occhi Donna mia
  Esser non puo che non fian lo mio sole
  Si mi percuoton forte, come ci suole
  Per l'arene di Libia chi s'invia,
  Mentre un caldo vapor (ne senti pria)
  Da quel lato si spinge ove mi duole,
  Che forsi amanti nelle lor parole
  Chiaman sospir; io non so che si sia:
  Parte rinchiusa, e turbida si cela
  Scosso mi il petto, e poi n'uscendo poco                             
  Quivi d' attorno o s'agghiaccia, o s'ingiela;
  Ma quanto a gli occhi giunge a trovar loco
  Tutte le notti a me suol far piovose
  Finche mia Alba rivien colma di rose.
  Giovane piano, e semplicetto amante
  Poi che fuggir me stesso in dubbio sono,
  Madonna a voi del mio cuor l'humil dono
  Faro divoto; io certo a prove tante
  L'hebbi fedele, intrepido, costante,
  De pensieri leggiadro, accorto, e buono;
  Quando rugge il gran mondo, e scocca il tuono,
  S 'arma di se, e d' intero diamante,
  Tanto del forse, e d' invidia sicuro,
  Di timori, e speranze al popol use                                   
  Quanto d'ingegno, e d' alto valor vago,
  E di cetra sonora, e delle muse:
  Sol troverete in tal parte men duro
  Ove amor mise l 'insanabil ago.
  How soon hath Time the suttle theef of youth,
  Stoln on his wing my three and twentith yeer!
  My hasting dayes flie on with full career,
  But my late spring no bud or blossom shew'th,
  Perhaps my semblance might deceive the truth,
  That I to manhood am arriv'd so near,
  And inward ripenes doth much less appear,
  That som more timely-happy spirits indu'th.
  Yet be it less or more, or soon or slow.
  It shall be still in strictest measure eev'n,                        
  To that same lot, however mean, or high,
  Toward which Time leads me, and the will of Heav'n;
  All is, if I have grace to use it so,
  As ever in my great task Masters eye.
  Captain or Colonel, or Knight in Arms,
  Whose chance on these defenceless dores may sease,
  If ever deed of honour did thee please,
  Guard them, and him within protect from harms,
  He can requite thee, for he knows the charms
  That call Fame on such gentle acts as these,
  And he can spred thy Name o're Lands and Seas,
  What ever clime the Suns bright circle warms.
  Lift not thy spear against the Muses Bowre,
  The great Emathian Conqueror bid spare                               
  The house of Pindarus, when Temple and Towre
  Went to the ground: And the repeated air
  Of sad Electra's Poet had the power
  To save th' Athenian Walls from ruine bare.
  Lady that in the prime of earliest youth,
  Wisely hath shun'd the broad way and the green,
  And with those few art eminently seen,
  That labour up the Hill of heav'nly Truth,
  The better part with Mary and with Ruth,
  Chosen thou hast, and they that overween,
  And at thy growing vertues fret their spleen,
  No anger find in thee, but pity and ruth.
  Thy care is fixt and zealously attends
  To fill thy odorous Lamp with deeds of light,
  And Hope that reaps not shame.  Therefore be sure
  Thou, when the Bridegroom with his feastfull friends
  Passes to bliss at the mid hour of night,
  Hast gain'd thy entrance, Virgin wise and pure.
  Daughter to that good Earl, once President
  Of Englands Counsel, and her Treasury,
  Who liv'd in both, unstain'd with gold or fee,
  And left them both, more in himself content,
  Till the sad breaking of that Parlament
  Broke him, as that dishonest victory
  At Chaeronea, fatal to liberty
  Kil'd with report that Old man eloquent,
  Though later born, then to have known the dayes
  Wherin your Father flourisht, yet by you                             
  Madam, me thinks I see him living yet;
  So well your words his noble vertues praise,
  That all both judge you to relate them true,
  And to possess them, Honour'd Margaret.
  A Book was writ of late call'd Tetrachordon;
  And wov'n close, both matter, form and stile;
  The Subject new: it walk'd the Town a while,
  Numbring good intellects; now seldom por'd on.
  Cries the stall-reader, bless us! what a word on
  A title page is this! and some in file
  Stand spelling fals, while one might walk to Mile-
  End Green.  Why is it harder Sirs then Gordon,
  Colkitto, or Macdonnel, or Galasp?
  Those rugged names to our like mouths grow sleek                     
  That would have made Quintilian stare and gasp.
  Thy age, like ours, O Soul of Sir John Cheek,
  Hated not Learning wors then Toad or Asp;
  When thou taught'st Cambridge, and King Edward Greek.
  I did but prompt the age to quit their cloggs
  By the known rules of antient libertie,
  When strait a barbarous noise environs me
  Of Owles and Cuckoes, Asses, Apes and Doggs.
  As when those Hinds that were transform'd to Froggs
  Raild at Latona's twin-born progenie
  Which after held the Sun and Moon in fee.
  But this is got by casting Pearl to Hoggs;
  That bawle for freedom in their senceless mood,
  And still revolt when truth would set them free.                     
  Licence they mean when they cry libertie;
  For who loves that, must first be wise and good;
  But from that mark how far they roave we see
  For all this wast of wealth, and loss of blood.
  Harry whose tuneful and well measur'd Song
  First taught our English Musick how to span
  Words with just note and accent, not to scan
  With Midas Ears, committing short and long;
  Thy worth and skill exempts thee from the throng,
  With praise enough for Envy to look wan;
  To after age thou shalt be writ the man,
  That with smooth aire couldst humor best our tongue
  Thou honour'st Verse, and Verse must send her wing
  To honour thee, the Priest of Phoebus Quire                          
  That tun'st their happiest lines in Hymn or Story
  Dante shall give Fame leave to set thee higher
  Then his Casella, whom he woo'd to sing
  Met in the milder shades of Purgatory.
  When Faith and Love which parted from thee never,
  Had ripen'd thy just soul to dwell with God,
  Meekly thou didst resign this earthy load
  Of Death, call'd Life; which us from Life doth sever
  Thy Works and Alms and all thy good Endeavour
  Staid not behind, nor in the grave were trod;
  But as Faith pointed with her golden rod,
  Follow'd thee up to joy and bliss for ever.
  Love led them on, and Faith who knew them best
  Thy hand-maids, clad them o're with purple beams                    
  And azure wings, that up they flew so drest,
  And speak the truth of thee on glorious Theams
  Before the Judge, who thenceforth bid thee rest
  And drink thy fill of pure immortal streams.
  Avenge O lord thy slaughter'd Saints, whose bones
  Lie scatter'd on the Alpine mountains cold,
  Ev'n them who kept thy truth so pure of old
  When all our Fathers worship't Stocks and Stones,
  Forget not: in thy book record their groanes
  Who were thy Sheep and in their antient Fold
  Slayn by the bloody Piemontese that roll'd
  Mother with Infant down the Rocks.  Their moans
  The Vales redoubl'd to the Hills, and they
  To Heav'n.  Their martyr'd blood and ashes sow                       
  O're all th'Italian fields where still doth sway
  The triple Tyrant: that from these may grow
  A hunder'd-fold, who having learnt thy way
  Early may fly the Babylonian wo.
  When I consider how my light is spent,
  E're half my days, in this dark world and wide,
  And that one Talent which is death to hide,
  Lodg'd with me useless, though my Soul more bent
  To serve therewith my Maker, and present
  My true account, least he returning chide,
  Doth God exact day-labour, light deny'd,
  I fondly ask; But patience to prevent
  That murmur, soon replies, God doth not need
  Either man's work or his own gifts, who best                         
  Bear his milde yoak, they serve him best, his State
  Is Kingly.  Thousands at his bidding speed
  And post o're Land and Ocean without rest:
  They also serve who only stand and waite.
  Lawrence of vertuous Father vertuous Son,
  Now that the Fields are dank, and ways are mire,
  Where shall we sometimes meet, and by the fire
  Help wast a sullen day; what may be Won
  From the hard Season gaining: time will run
  On smoother, till Favonius re-inspire
  The frozen earth; and cloth in fresh attire
  The Lillie and Rose, that neither sow'd nor spun.
  What neat repast shall feast us, light and choice,
  Of Attick tast, with Wine, whence we may rise                        
  To hear the Lute well toucht, or artfull voice
  Warble immortal Notes and Tuskan Ayre?
  He who of those delights can judge, and spare
  To interpose them oft, is not unwise.
  Cyriack, whose Grandsire on the Royal Bench
  Of Brittish Themis, with no mean applause
  Pronounc't and in his volumes taught our Lawes,
  Which others at their Barr so often wrench:
  To day deep thoughts resolve with me to drench
  In mirth, that after no repenting drawes;
  Let Euclid rest and Archimedes pause,
  And what the Swede intend, and what the French.
  To measure life, learn thou betimes, and know
  Toward solid good what leads the nearest way;                        
  For other things mild Heav'n a time ordains,
  And disapproves that care, though wise in show,
  That with superfluous burden loads the day,
  And when God sends a cheerful hour, refrains.
  Methought I saw my late espoused Saint
  Brought to me like Alcestis from the grave,
  Whom Joves great Son to her glad Husband gave,
  Rescu'd from death by force though pale and faint.
  Mine as whom washt from spot of child-bed taint,
  Purification in the old Law did save,
  And such, as yet once more I trust to have
  Full sight of her in Heaven without restraint,
  Came vested all in white, pure as her mind:
  Her face was vail'd, yet to my fancied sight,                        
  Love, sweetness, goodness, in her person shin'd
  So clear, as in no face with more delight.
  But O as to embrace me she enclin'd
  I wak'd, she fled, and day brought back my night.
  A sudden blow: the great wings beating still
  Above the staggering girl, her thighs caressed
  By the dark webs, her nape caught in his bill,
  He holds her helpless breast upon his breast.
  How can those terrified vague fingers push
  The feathered glory from her loosening thighs?
  And how can body, laid in that white rush,
  But feel the strange heart beating where it lies?
  A shudder in the loins engenders there
  The broken wall, the burning roof and tower
  And Agamemnon dead.
  Being so caught up,
  So mastered by the brute blood of the air,
  Did she put on his knowledge with his power
  Before the indifferent beak could let her drop?
  A pronoun is a kind of withdrawal from naming.
  Because naming is heavy, naming may be slightly shaming.
  We live much more lightly than this,
  we address ourselves allusively in our minds 
  as I or we or one  part of a system
  that argues with shadow, like Venetian blinds.
  Speaking of Venice, called the Shakespeare of cities by a friend of  mine,
  reminds me of how often theSonnetsmisprinttheirforthine:
  beware the fog in Venice.
  Beware those footsteps that stop in a hush.
  I used to think I would grow up to be a person whose reasoning was   deep,
  instead I became a kind of brush.
  I brush words against words. So do we follow ourselves out of youth,
  brushing, brushing, brushing wild grapes onto truth.
  Loving in truth, and fain in verse my love to show,
  That she, dear she, might take some pleasure of my pain,
  Pleasure might cause her read, reading might make her know,
  Knowledge might pity win, and pity grace obtain,
  I sought fit words to paint the blackest face of woe;
  Studying inventions fine her wits to entertain,
  Oft turning others' leaves, to see if thence would flow
  Some fresh and fruitful showers upon my sunburn'd brain.
  But words came halting forth, wanting invention's stay;
  Invention, Nature's child, fled step-dame Study's blows;
  And others' feet still seem'd but strangers in my way.
  Thus great with child to speak and helpless in my throes,
  Biting my truant pen, beating myself for spite,
  "Fool," said my Muse to me, "look in thy heart, and write."
  Stella is sick, and in that sick-bed lies
  Sweetness, that breathes and pants as oft as she;
  And grace, sick too, such fine conclusions tries
  That sickness brags itself best graced to be.
  Beauty is sick, but sick in so fair guise
  That in that paleness beautys white we see;
  And joy, which is inseparate from these eyes,
  Stella now learns (strange case!) to weep in thee.
  Love moves thy pain, and like a faithful page,
  As thy looks stir, runs up and down, to make
  All folks prest at thy will thy pain to assuage;
  Nature with care sweats for her darlings sake,
  Knowing worlds pass, ere she enough can find
  Of such heaven stuff, to clothe so heavenly mind.
  Where be the roses gone, which sweetened so our eyes?
  Where those red cheeks, which oft with fair increase did frame
  The height of honor in the kindly badge of shame?
  Who hath the crimson weeds stolen from my morning skies?
  How doth the color vade of those vermilion dyes,
  Which Nature's self did make, and self engrained the same!
  I would know by what right this paleness overcame
  That hue, whose force my heart still unto thraldom ties?
  Galen's adoptive sons, who by a beaten way
  Their judgements hackney on, the fault on sickness lay;
  But feeling proof makes me say they mistake it far:
  It is but love, which makes his paper perfect white
  To write therein more fresh the story of delight,
  Whiles beauty's reddest ink Venus for him doth stir.
  O absent presence, Stella is not here;
  False flattering hope, that with so fair a face
  Bare me in hand, that in this orphan place
  Stella, I say my Stella, should appear.
  What sayst thou now? Where is that dainty cheer
  Thou toldst mine eyes should help their famished case?
  But thou art gone, now that self-felt disgrace
  Doth make me most to wish thy comfort near.
  But here I do store of fair ladies meet,
  Who may with charm of conversation sweet
  Make in my heavy mould new thoughts to grow:
  Sure they prevail as much with me, as he
  That bade his friend, but then new maimed, to be
  Merry with him, and not think of his woe.
  Stella, since thou so right a princess art
  Of all the powers which life bestows on me,
  There ere by them aught undertaken be
  They first resort unto that sovereign part;
  Sweet, for a while give respite to my heart,
  Which pants as though it still should leap to thee,
  And on my thoughts give thy lieutenancy
  To this great cause, which needs both use and art,
  And as a queen, who from her presence sends
  Whom she employs, dismiss from thee my wit,
  Till it have wrought what thy own will attends.
  On servants shame oft masters blame doth sit.
  Oh let not fools in me thy works reprove,
  And scorning say, See what it is to love.
  Alas, have I not pain enough, my friend,
  Upon whose breast a fiercer gripe doth tire
  Than did on him who first stale down the fire,
  While Love on me doth all his quiver spend,
  But with your rhubarb words you must contend
  To grieve me worse, in saying that Desire
  Doth plunge my well-formed soul even in the mire
  Of sinful thoughts, which do in ruin end?
  If that be sin which doth the manners frame,
  Well stayed with truth in word and faith of deed,
  Ready of wit, and fearing naught but shame;
  If that be sin which in fixed hearts doth breed
  A loathing of all loose unchastity,
  Then love is sin, and let me sinful be.
  You that do search for every purling spring
  Which from the ribs of old Parnassus flows,
  And every flower, not sweet perhaps, which grows
  Near thereabouts, into your poesy wring;
  Ye that do dictionary's method bring
  Into your rimes, running in rattling rows;
  You that poor Petrarch's long-deceased woes
  With new-born sighs and denizen'd wit do sing:
  You take wrong ways; those far-fet helps be such
  As do bewray a want of inward touch,
  And sure, at length stol'n goods do come to light.
  But if, both for your love and skill, your name
  You seek to nurse at fullest breasts of Fame,
  Stella behold, and then begin to endite.
  Not at first sight, nor with a dribbd shot,
  Love gave the wound which while I breathe will bleed:
  But known worth did in mine of time proceed,
  Till by degrees it had full conquest got.
  I saw, and liked; I liked, but lovd not;
  I loved, but straight did not what love decreed:
  At length to loves decrees I, forced, agreed,
  Yet with repining at so partial lot.
  Now even that footstep of lost liberty
  Is gone, and now like slave-born Muscovite
  I call it praise to suffer tyranny;
  And now employ the remnant of my wit
  To make myself believe that all is well,
  While with a feeling skill I paint my hell.
  The wisest scholar of the wight most wise
  By Phoebus doom, with sugared sentence says
  That Virtue, if it once met with our eyes,
  Strange flames of love it in our souls would raise;
  But, for that man with pain this truth descries,
  While he each thing in senses balance weighs,
  And so nor will nor can behold those skies
  Which inward sun to heroic mind displays,
  Virtue of late, with virtuous care to stir
  Love of herself, takes Stellas shape, that she
  To mortal eyes might sweetly shine in her.
  It is most true, for since I her did see,
  Virtues great beauty in that face I prove,
  And find theffect, for I do burn in love.
  The curious wits, seeing dull pensiveness
  Bewray itself in my long-settl'd eyes,
  Whence those same fumes of melancholy rise,
  With idle pains and missing aim do guess.
  Some, that know how my spring I did address,
  Deem that my Muse some fruit of knowledge plies;
  Others, because the prince my service tries,
  Think that I think state errors to redress;
  But harder judges judge ambition's ragei
  Scourge of itself, still climbing slipp'ry placei
  Holds my young brain captiv'd in golden cage.
  O fool or over-wise! alas, the race
  Of all my thoughts hath neither stop nor start
  But only Stella's eyes and Stella's heart.
  Your words my friend (right healthful caustics) blame
  My young mind marred, whom Love doth windlass so,
  That mine own writings like bad servants show
  My wits, quick in vain thoughts, in virtue lame,
  That Plato I read for nought, but if he tame
  Such coltish gyres, that to my birth I owe
  Nobler desires, least else that friendly foe,
  Great expectation, wear a train of shame.
  For since mad March great promise made of me,
  If now the May of my years much decline,
  What can be hoped my harvest time will be?
  Sure you say well, your wisdoms golden mine
  Dig deep with learnings spade, now tell me this,
  Hath this world ought so fair as Stella is?
  Fly, fly, my friends, I have my death wound, fly!
  See there that boy, that murd'ring boy, I say,
  Who, like a thief, hid in dark bush doth lie
  Till bloody bullet get him wrongful prey.
  So tyrant he no fitter place could spy,
  Nor so fair level in so secret stay,
  As that sweet black which veils the heav'nly eye;
  There himself with his shot he close doth lay.
  Poor passenger, pass now thereby I did,
  And stay'd, pleas'd with the prospect of the place,
  While that black hue from me the bad guest hid;
  But straight I saw motions of lightning grace
  And then descried the glist'ring of his dart:
  But ere I could fly thence it pierc'd my heart.
  Bright star! would I were steadfast as thou art
  Not in lone splendour hung aloft the night,
  And watching, with eternal lids apart,
  Like Natures patient sleepless Eremite,
  The moving waters at their priestlike task
  Of pure ablution round earths human shores,
  Or gazing on the new soft fallen mask
  Of snow upon the mountains and the moors
  Noyet still steadfast, still unchangeable,
  Pillowd upon my fair loves ripening breast,
  To feel for ever its soft fall and swell,
  Awake for ever in a sweet unrest,
  Still, still to hear her tender-taken breath,
  And so live everor else swoon to death.
  Much have I travelld in the realms of gold,
  And many goodly states and kingdoms seen;
  Round many western islands have I been
  Which bards in fealty to Apollo hold.
  Oft of one wide expanse had I been told
  That deep-browd Homer ruled as his demesne;
  Yet did I never breathe its pure serene
  Till I heard Chapman speak out loud and bold:
  Then felt I like some watcher of the skies
  When a new planet swims into his ken;
  Or like stout Cortez when with eagle eyes
  He stard at the Pacificand all his men
  Lookd at each other with a wild surmise
  Silent, upon a peak in Darien.
  O golden tongued Romance, with serene lute!
  Fair plumed Syren, Queen of far-away!
  Leave melodizing on this wintry day,
  Shut up thine olden pages, and be mute:
  Adieu! for once again the fierce dispute
  Betwixt damnation and impassiond clay
  Must I burn through; once more humbly assay
  The bitter-sweet of this Shakespearian fruit.
  Chief Poet! and ye clouds of Albion,
  Begetters of our deep eternal theme!
  When through the old oak Forest I am gone,
  Let me not wander in a barren dream,
  But when I am consumed in the fire,
  Give me new Phoenix wings to fly at my desire
  You who desired so muchin vain to ask
  Yet fed you hunger like an endless task,
  Dared dignify the labor, bless the quest
  Achieved that stillness ultimately best,
  Being, of all, least sought for: Emily, hear!
  O sweet, dead Silencer, most suddenly clear
  When singing that Eternity possessed
  And plundered momently in every breast;
  Truly no flower yet withers in your hand.
  The harvest you descried and understand
  Needs more than wit to gather, love to bind.
  Some reconcilement of remotest mind
  Leaves Ormus rubyless, and Ophir chill.
  Else tears heap all within one clay-cold hill
  Often beneath the wave, wide from this ledge
  The dice of drowned mens bones he saw bequeath
  An embassy. Their numbers as he watched,
  Beat on the dusty shore and were obscured.
  And wrecks passed without sound of bells,
  The calyx of deaths bounty giving back
  A scattered chapter, livid hieroglyph,
  The portent wound in corridors of shells.
  Then in the circuit calm of one vast coil,
  Its lashings charmed and malice reconciled,
  Frosted eyes there were that lifted altars;
  And silent answers crept across the stars.
  Compass, quadrant and sextant contrive
  No farther tides  High in the azure steeps
  Monody shall not wake the mariner.
  This fabulous shadow only the sea keeps
  Whoso list to hunt, I know where is an hind,
  But as for me, hlas, I may no more.
  The vain travail hath wearied me so sore,
  I am of them that farthest cometh behind.
  Yet may I by no means my wearied mind
  Draw from the deer, but as she fleeth afore
  Fainting I follow. I leave off therefore,
  Sithens in a net I seek to hold the wind.
  Who list her hunt, I put him out of doubt,
  As well as I may spend his time in vain.
  And graven with diamonds in letters plain
  There is written, her fair neck round about:
  Noli me tangere, for Caesar's I am,
  And wild for to hold, though I seem tame.
  Lo, even as I passed beside the booth
  Of roses, and beheld them brightly twine
  To damask heights, taking them as a sign
  Of my own self still unconcerned with truth;
  Even as I held up in hands uncouth
  And drained with joy the golden-bodied wine,
  Deeming it half-unworthy, half divine,
  From out the sweet-rimmed goblet of my youth.
  Even in that pure hour I heard the tone
  Of grievous music stir in memory,
  Telling me of the time already flown
  From my first youth. It sounded like the rise
  Of distant echo from dead melody,
  Soft as a song heard far in Paradise.
  Thou fair-hair'd angel of the evening,
  Now, whilst the sun rests on the mountains, light
  Thy bright torch of love; thy radiant crown
  Put on, and smile upon our evening bed!
  Smile on our loves, and while thou drawest the
  Blue curtains of the sky, scatter thy silver dew
  On every flower that shuts its sweet eyes
  In timely sleep. Let thy west wind sleep on
  The lake; speak silence with thy glimmering eyes,
  And wash the dusk with silver. Soon, full soon,
  Dost thou withdraw; then the wolf rages wide,
  And the lion glares thro' the dun forest:
  The fleeces of our flocks are cover'd with
  Thy sacred dew: protect them with thine influence.
  How do I love thee? Let me count the ways.
  I love thee to the depth and breadth and height
  My soul can reach, when feeling out of sight
  For the ends of Being and ideal Grace.
  I love thee to the level of everyday's
  Most quiet need, by sun and candle-light.
  I love thee freely, as men strive for Right;
  I love thee purely, as they turn from Praise.
  I love thee with the passion put to use
  In my old griefs, and with my childhood's faith.
  I love thee with a love I seemed to lose
  With my lost saints,--I love thee with the breath,
  Smiles, tears, of all my life!--and, if God choose,
  I shall but love thee better after death.
  Thou hast made me, and shall thy work decay?
  Repair me now, for now mine end doth haste,
  I run to death, and death meets me as fast,
  And all my pleasures are like yesterday;
  I dare not move my dim eyes any way,
  Despair behind, and death before doth cast
  Such terror, and my feeble flesh doth waste
  By sin in it, which it t'wards hell doth weigh;
  Only thou art above, and when towards thee
  By thy leave I can look, I rise again;
  But our old subtle foe so tempteth me,
  That not one hour my self I can sustain;
  Thy Grace may wing me to prevent his art,
  As due by many titles I resign
  My self to Thee, O God; first I was made
  By Thee, and for Thee, and when I was decayed
  Thy blood bought that, the which before was Thine;
  I am Thy son, made with Thy Self to shine,
  Thy servant, whose pains Thou hast still repaid,
  Thy sheep, thine image, and, till I betrayed
  My self, a temple of Thy Spirit divine;
  Why doth the devil then usurp on me?
  Why doth he steal, nay ravish that's thy right?
  Except thou rise and for thine own work fight,
  Oh I shall soon despair, when I do see
  That thou lov'st mankind well, yet wilt not choose me,
  And Satan hates me, yet is loth to lose me.
  O might those sighs and tears return again
  Into my breast and eyes, which I have spent,
  That I might in this holy discontent
  Mourn with some fruit, as I have mourned in vain;
  In mine Idolatry what showers of rain
  Mine eyes did waste! what griefs my heart did rent!
  That sufferance was my sin; now I repent;
  'Cause I did suffer I must suffer pain.
  Th' hydropic drunkard, and night-scouting thief,
  The itchy lecher, and self-tickling proud
  Have the remembrance of past joys for relief
  Of comming ills. To (poor) me is allowed
  No ease; for long, yet vehement grief hath been
  Th' effect and cause, the punishment and sin.
  Oh my black soul! now art thou summoned
  By sickness, death's herald, and champion;
  Thou art like a pilgrim, which abroad hath done
  Treason, and durst not turn to whence he is fled;
  Or like a thief, which till death's doom be read,
  Wisheth himself delivered from prison,
  But damned and haled to execution,
  Wisheth that still he might be imprisoned.
  Yet grace, if thou repent, thou canst not lack;
  But who shall give thee that grace to begin?
  Oh make thy self with holy mourning black,
  And red with blushing, as thou art with sin;
  Or wash thee in Christ's blood, which hath this might
  That being red, it dyes red souls to white.
  At the round earth's imagined corners, blow
  Your trumpets, Angels, and arise, arise
  From death, you numberless infinities
  Of souls, and to your scattered bodies go,
  All whom the flood did, and fire shall o'erthrow,
  All whom war, dearth, age, agues, tyrannies,
  Despair, law, chance, hath slain, and you whose eyes,
  Shall behold God, and never taste death's woe.
  But let them sleep, Lord, and me mourn a space,
  For, if above all these, my sins abound,
  'Tis late to ask abundance of thy grace,
  When we are there; here on this lowly ground,
  Teach me how to repent; for that's as good
  As if thou hadst seal'd my pardon, with thy blood.
  If faithful souls be alike glorified
  As angels, then my father's soul doth see,
  And adds this even to full felicity,
  That valiantly I hell's wide mouth o'erstride:
  But if our minds to these souls be descried
  By circumstances, and by signs that be
  Apparent in us, not immediately,
  How shall my mind's white truth by them be tried?
  They see idolatrous lovers weep and mourn,
  And vile blasphemous conjurers to call
  On Jesus name, and Pharisaical
  Dissemblers feigne devotion. Then turn,
  O pensive soul, to God, for he knows best
  Thy true grief, for he put it in my breast.
  Death be not proud, though some have called thee
  Mighty and dreadful, for thou art not so,
  For those whom thou think'st thou dost overthrow,
  Die not, poor death, nor yet canst thou kill me.
  From rest and sleep, which but thy pictures be,
  Much pleasure, then from thee, much more must flow,
  And soonest our best men with thee do go,
  Rest of their bones, and soul's delivery.
  Thou art slave to Fate, Chance, kings, and desperate men,
  And dost with poison, war, and sickness dwell,
  And poppy, or charms can make us sleep as well,
  And better than thy stroke; why swell'st thou then?
  One short sleep past, we wake eternally,
  And death shall be no more; death, thou shalt die.
  SeeResurrection.
  Spit in my face you Jews, and pierce my side,
  Buffet, and scoff, scourge, and crucify me,
  For I have sinned, and sinned, and only he
  Who could do no iniquity hath died:
  But by my death can not be satisfied
  My sins, which pass the Jews' impiety:
  They killed once an inglorious man, but I
  Crucify him daily, being now glorified.
  Oh let me, then, his strange love still admire:
  Kings pardon, but he bore our punishment.
  And Jacob came clothed in vile harsh attire
  But to supplant, and with gainful intent:
  God clothed himself in vile man's flesh, that so
  He might be weak enough to suffer woe.
  Why are we by all creatures waited on?
  Why do the prodigal elements supply
  Life and food to me, being more pure than I,
  Simple, and further from corruption?
  Why brook'st thou, ignorant horse, subjection?
  Why dost thou, bull, and bore so seelily,
  Dissemble weakness, and by one man's stroke die,
  Whose whole kind you might swallow and feed upon?
  Weaker I am, woe is me, and worse than you,
  You have not sinned, nor need be timorous.
  But wonder at a greater wonder, for to us
  Created nature doth these things subdue,
  But their Creator, whom sin nor nature tied,
  For us, His creatures, and His foes, hath died.
  What if this present were the world's last night?
  Mark in my heart, O soul, where thou dost dwell,
  The picture of Christ crucified, and tell
  Whether that countenance can thee affright,
  Tears in his eyes quench the amazing light,
  Blood fills his frowns, which from his pierced head fell.
  And can that tongue adjudge thee unto hell,
  Which prayed forgiveness for his foes' fierce spite?
  No, no; but as in my idolatry
  I said to all my profane mistresses,
  Beauty, of pity, foulness only is
  A sign of rigour: so I say to thee,
  To wicked spirits are horrid shapes assigned,
  This beauteous form assures a piteous mind.
  Batter my heart, three-person'd God; for you
  As yet but knock, breathe, shine, and seek to mend;
  That I may rise, and stand, o'erthrow me and bend
  Your force, to break, blow, burn and make me new.
  I, like an usurpt town, to another due,
  Labour to admit you, but Oh, to no end,
  Reason your viceroy in me, me should defend,
  But is captiv'd, and proves weak or untrue.
  Yet dearly I love you, and would be loved fain,
  But am betroth'd unto your enemy:
  Divorce me, untie, or break that knot again,
  Take me to you, imprison me, for I
  Except you enthrall me, never shall be free,
  Nor ever chaste, except you ravish me.
  Wilt thou love God, as he thee? Then digest,
  My soul, this wholesome meditation,
  How God the Spirit, by angels waited on
  In heaven, doth make his Temple in thy breast.
  The Father having begot a Son most blest,
  And still begetting, (for he ne'er be gone)
  Hath deigned to choose thee by adoption,
  Co-heir t' his glory, and Sabbath' endless rest.
  And as a robbed man, which by search doth find
  His stol'n stuff sold, must lose or buy 't again:
  The Son of glory came down, and was slain,
  Us whom he'd made, and Satan stol'n, to unbind.
  'Twas much that man was made like God before,
  But, that God should be made like man, much more.
  Father, part of his double interest
  Unto thy kingdom, thy Son gives to me,
  His jointure in the knotty Trinity
  He keeps, and gives to me his death's conquest.
  This Lamb, whose death with life the world hath blest,
  Was from the world's beginning slain, and he
  Hath made two Wills which with the Legacy
  Of his and thy kingdom do thy Sons invest.
  Yet such are thy laws that men argue yet
  Whether a man those statutes can fulfil;
  None doth; but all-healing grace and spirit
  Revive again what law and letter kill.
  Thy law's abridgement, and thy last command
  Is all but love; Oh let this last Will stand!
  Oh, to vex me, contraries meet in one:
  Inconstancy unnaturally hath begot
  A constant habit; that when I would not
  I change in vows, and in devotion.
  As humorous is my contrition
  As my profane love, and as soon forgot:
  As riddlingly distempered, cold and hot,
  As praying, as mute; as infinite, as none.
  I durst not view heaven yesterday; and today
  In prayers and flattering speeches I court God:
  Tomorrow I quake with true fear of his rod.
  So my devout fits come and go away
  Like a fantastic ague; save that here
  Those are my best days, when I shake with fear.
  I met a traveller from an antique land
  Who said: Two vast and trunkless legs of stone
  Stand in the desert . . . Near them, on the sand,
  Half sunk, a shattered visage lies, whose frown,
  And wrinkled lip, and sneer of cold command,
  Tell that its sculptor well those passions read
  Which yet survive, stamped on these lifeless things,
  The hand that mocked them, and the heart that fed:
  And on the pedestal these words appear:
  "My name is Ozymandias, king of kings:
  Look on my works, ye Mighty, and despair!"
  Nothing beside remains. Round the decay
  Of that colossal wreck, boundless and bare
  The lone and level sands stretch far away.
  An old, mad, blind, despised, and dying king,--
  Princes, the dregs of their dull race, who
  Through public scorn,--mud from a muddy spring,--
  Rulers who neither see, nor feel, nor know,
  But leech-like to their fainting country cling,
  Till they drop, blind in blood, without a blow,--
  A people starved and stabbed in the untilled field,--
  An army, which liberticide and prey
  Makes as a two-edged sword to all who wield,--
  Golden and sanguine laws which tempt and slay;
  Religion Christless, Godless--a book sealed;
  A Senate, Time's worst statute unrepealed,--
  Are graves, from which a glorious Phantom may
  Burst, to illumine our tempestuous day.
  Happy ye leaves! whenas those lily hands,
  Which hold my life in their dead doing might,
  Shall handle you, and hold in love's soft bands,
  Like captives trembling at the victor's sight.
  And happy lines! on which, with starry light,
  Those lamping eyes will deign sometimes to look,
  And read the sorrows of my dying sprite,
  Written with tears in heart's close bleeding book.
  And happy rhymes! bathed in the sacred brook
  Of Helicon, whence she derived is,
  When ye behold that angel's blessed look,
  My soul's long lacked food, my heaven's bliss.
  Leaves, lines, and rhymes seek her to please alone,
  Whom if ye please, I care for other none.
  Most glorious Lord of life, that on this day
  Didst make thy triumph over death and sin,
  And having harrowed hell, didst bring away
  Captivity thence captive, us to win:
  This joyous day, dear Lord, with joy begin,
  And grant that we, for whom thou diddest die,
  Being with thy dear blood clean washed from sin,
  May live forever in felicity:
  And that thy love we weighing worthily,
  May likewise love thee for the same again;
  And for thy sake, that all like dear didst buy,
  May love with one another entertain.
  So let us love, dear love, like as we ought,
  Love is the lesson which the Lord us taught.
  One day I wrote her name upon the strand,
  But came the waves and washed it away:
  Again I wrote it with a second hand,
  But came the tide, and made my pains his prey.
  Vain man, said she, that dost in vain assay
  A mortal thing so to immortalize!
  For I myself shall like to this decay,
  And eek my name be wiped out likewise.
  Not so (quoth I), let baser things devise
  To die in dust, but you shall live by fame:
  My verse your virtues rare shall eternize,
  And in the heavens write your glorious name;
  Where, whenas death shall all the world subdue,
  Our love shall live, and later life renew.
  Fair is my love, when her fair golden hairs
  With the loose wind ye waving chance to mark:
  Fair, when the rose in her red cheeks appears,
  Or in her eyes the fire of love does spark:
  Fair, when her breast, like a rich laden bark
  With precious merchandise she forth doth lay:
  Fair, when that cloud of pride, which oft doth dark
  Her goodly light, with smiles she drives away
  But fairest she, when so she doth display
  The gate with pearls and rubies richly dight,
  Through which her words so wise do make their way,
  To bear the message of her gentle sprite.
  The rest be works of nature's wonderment,
  But this the work of heart's astonishment.
